Mol Diagn Ther (2015) 19:255–265
DOI 10.1007/s40291-015-0166-z

R E V I E W A R T I C L E

Treatment Against Human Endogenous Retrovirus: A Possible
Personalized Medicine Approach for Multiple Sclerosis

Franc¸ois Curtin1,2
Alois B. Lang1

• Herve´ Perron1

• Raphael Faucard1

• Herve´ Porchet1,3

•

Published online: 16 September 2015
Ó Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015

Abstract Human endogenous retroviruses (HERV) rep-
resent about 8 % of the human genome. Some of these
genetic elements are expressed in pathological circum-
stances. A HERV protein, the multiple sclerosis–associated
retrovirus (MSRV) envelope protein (MSRV-Env),
is
expressed in the blood and active brain lesions of multiple
sclerosis (MS) patients. It possesses pro-inﬂammatory and
myelinotoxic properties. The patterns of expression and
pathogenic properties of MSRV-Env make it a relevant
drug target for MS therapeutics—in particular for pre-
venting neurodegeneration, a key component of progres-
sive forms of MS. An immunoglobulin G4 monoclonal
antibody (mAb), called GNbAC1, has been developed to
neutralize this pathogenic target. After showing neutraliz-
ing effects in vitro and in mouse models of MS, GNbAC1
is now in phase II clinical development. MSRV-related
biomarkers such as MSRV-Env and MSRV polymerase
(MSRV-Pol) gene transcripts are overexpressed in the
blood and cerebrospinal ﬂuid of patients with MS. These
biomarkers may have prognostic value for long-term MS
evolution, and their transcription levels in blood decline
during treatments with GNbAC1, which has also been
reported in patients administered reference MS drugs such
as natalizumab or interferon-b. GNbAC1 as a new MSRV-
Env-antagonist mAb could be a speciﬁc and causal

& Franc¸ois Curtin
fc@geneuro.com

1 GeNeuro SA, 18 Chemin des Aulx, Plan-les-Ouates,

1228 Geneva, Switzerland

2 Division of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology Division,

Geneva University Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland

3 Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Health Sciences,

University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa

treatment for MS, with a particular application for pro-
gressive forms of the disease. For possible use in com-
panion diagnostic tests, MSRV-associated biomarkers
could open the door to a personalized therapeutic approach
for MS.

Key Points

GNbAC is an immunoglobulin G4 monoclonal
antibody targeting a protein of endogenous retroviral
origin.

The target protein appears to play a critical role in
the pathophysiology of multiple sclerosis.

Biomarkers related to the target could play a role in
companion diagnostic tests.

1 Introduction

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inﬂammatory, demyelinating,
and neurodegenerative disorder of the central nervous
system (CNS), of unknown etiology. An autoimmune
process underlies the pathophysiology of
the disease;
however; inﬂammation and neurodegeneration are closely
associated during the disease: autoimmunity seems to
predominate at the beginning of the disease evolution,
while neurodegeneration prevails at the late stages and is
associated with the progression of disability. The interre-
lations between both pathophysiological processes are
complex and far from being fully understood [1].

256

F. Curtin et al.

Clinically, MS can manifest with different symptoms,
but the most frequent ones include acute and subacute
motor dysfunction of the limbs, sensory disturbance, gait
disorders, partial or complete visual loss, autonomic dys-
function, fatigue, cognitive symptoms, and psychiatric
abnormalities [2].

There are different clinical phenotypes of MS, three of
which are the most prevalent. The prevalence ﬁgures are
variable according to different studies [3, 4]. The most
frequent form, with a prevalence of about 60 %, is deﬁned
as ‘‘relapsing–remitting MS’’ (RRMS), in which patients
have recurrent attacks of neurological symptoms followed
by symptomatic improvement
ranging from complete
remission to signiﬁcant remaining neurological dysfunc-
tion. After 10–20 years of evolution, about 75–85 % of
these patients convert
to ‘‘secondary progressive MS’’
(SPMS), in which the neurological dysfunction progresses
slowly and the cycle of exacerbations/remissions progres-
sively wanes. The actual prevalence of SPMS is around
20 %. The third group, representing about 10 % of MS
patients, have the ‘‘primary progressive MS’’ (PPMS)
form, in which progressive neurological disability tends to
accumulate from the time of clinical onset. Other less
prevalent phenotypes of MS have also been described.

Pathologically, MS is characterized by inﬂammatory
inﬁltrates associated with focal demyelination lesions
(plaques) in the brain and spinal cord white matter, as well
as in the gray matter. Inﬂammation is dominated by
T-lymphocyte cells and activated microglia. In active
lesions, this process is accompanied by disruption of the
blood–brain barrier and local expression of pro-inﬂamma-
tory cytokines and their receptors. Complete demyelination
is accompanied by a variable degree of axonal injury and
loss. These acute inﬂammatory plaques dominate the
pathology in RRMS [5]. In the chronic progressive forms
of MS (SPMS and PPMS), the pathology differs somewhat.
Focal demyelinated white matter lesions are present, but
active demyelinating plaques are rare. Pre-existing plaques
show evidence of slow and gradual expansion of the
lesions at
their margins, characterized by moderate
inﬂammatory inﬁltrates, mainly composed of perivascular
macrophages and profound microglia activation. The
demyelination process is slow: the normal-appearing white
matter is affected by a diffuse inﬂammatory process and
generalized activation of microglia, associated with diffuse
axonal injury and destruction, also followed by secondary
demyelination. Extensive cortical demyelination associated
with inﬂammatory inﬁltrates in the leptomeninges is seen
in the forebrain and the cerebellum [5].

Because of the immunoinﬂammatory characteristics of
MS, which are particularly prevalent in the RRMS form,
treatments for MS that act by inhibiting lymphocyte acti-
vation have played a critical
role for a long time.

Corticosteroids were ﬁrst
introduced as a treatment of
choice for MS; however, they appeared to have no real
impact on the long-term course of the disease. Major
progress in MS treatment was made with the introduction
of the ﬁrst disease-modifying therapies (DMTs), i.e., drugs
that are able to alter the course of MS [6]. The ﬁrst of these
drugs were the b-interferons (b-IFNs), introduced in the
1990s. Since then, several different DMTs have been reg-
istered for MS as injectable drugs and more recently as oral
formulations: all of them possess an immunomodulatory or
immunosuppressive mode of action (for a review, see
Curtin and Hartung [7]), and they are efﬁcacious in treating
RRMS, at least by decreasing the frequency of relapses.
However, none of them has shown real efﬁcacy in the
treatment of either PPMS or SPMS. Currently, most MS
drugs in clinical development are based on immunomod-
ulation or immunosuppression. However, a couple of new
molecules aimed at promoting remyelination are now at the
early clinical development stage [8].

retrovirus

We present here a new therapeutic approach for the
treatment of MS, which does not affect the immune system
and is intended to neutralize a protein of human endoge-
nous retroviral (HERV) origin, called the multiple sclero-
sis–associated
protein
(MSRV-Env), which is likely to play a key role in the
pathophysiology of MS. We describe the development of a
speciﬁc treatment against
target, based on an
immunoglobulin (Ig) G4 monoclonal antibody (mAb),
called GNbAC1, co-developed with a panel of MSRV-re-
lated biomarkers, which may have potential for use in
companion diagnostic tests.

this

(MSRV)

envelope

2 Human Endogenous Retrovirus and Molecular

Pharmacology

2.1 MSRV-Env as a TLR4 Activator

The gene encoding the MSRV-Env protein belongs to the
HERV-W family of retroviral elements, which are widely
and heterogeneously dispersed in the human genome, fol-
lowing the integration events of a corresponding exogenous
retrovirus, which ﬁrst infected the germ line of primates
(Catharrhines) about 25 million years ago [9, 10]. The
HERV elements represent approximately 8 % of
the
human genomic sequences. From a phylogenic perspective,
HERV-W elements,
to which MSRV belongs, share
homologies with other endogenous or exogenous retro-
viruses, as shown in Fig. 1 (for a review, see Weiss [11]).
The role of these elements in the causation of human dis-
orders and,
in autoimmune diseases is
beginning to be better understood and is now a subject of
active research [12, 13].

in particular,

Treatment Against Human Endogenous Retrovirus

257

Fig. 1 Phylogeny of endogenous and exogenous retroviruses, accord-
ing to Weiss
[11]. ALV avian leukosis virus, BaEV baboon
endogenous virus, BFV Barmah Forest virus, BLV bovine leukemia
virus, EIAV equine infectious anemia virus, FeLV feline leukemia
virus, FFV feline foamy virus, FIV feline immunodeﬁciency virus,
GALV gibbon ape leukemia virus, HERV human endogenous
retrovirus, HIV human immunodeﬁciency virus, HTLV human T-cell

lymphotropic virus, JRSV Jaagsiekte sheep retrovirus, MLV murine
leukemia virus, MMTV mouse mammary tumor virus, MVV Maedi-
visna virus, PERV porcine endogenous retrovirus, RSV respiratory
syncytial virus, SIVmac macaque simian immunodeﬁciency virus,
SnRV snakehead retrovirus, SRV simian retrovirus, SFVagm simian
foamy virus type 3 (strain LK3), SFVcpz chimpanzee foamy virus,
WDSV walleye dermal sarcoma virus

cells

The MSRV-Env protein comprises three domains: the
signal peptide, the surface (SU) domain or ectodomain, and
the transmembrane (TM) domain. The SU domain is an
agonist of Toll-like receptor (TLR)-4. Following the ﬁrst
observation that the in vitro abnormal immune response
characterized by T-lymphocyte polyclonal activation was
associated with MSRV-Env [14], the cytokines induced by
the SU domain of MSRV-Env protein were evaluated in
peripheral blood mononuclear
(PBMCs). This
revealed an early increase in interleukin (IL)-1b, IL-6, and
IL-12p40, reﬂecting innate immune activation, followed by
IFN-c production reﬂecting delayed but potent T cell
immune reaction, as expected from previous studies. This
also unraveled the key role of TLR4 as an upstream
receptor in the immunoinﬂammatory cascade when it is
exposed to MSRV-Env. MSRV-Env itself was revealed to
be a potent agonist of TLR4-mediated immune activation
pathways, leading to both acute and chronic inﬂammation,
as well as to autoimmunity [15, 16]. MSRV-Env appears
pathogenic to all human PBMCs tested in vitro, and an
interesting observation is that the magnitude of the IL-6
and IL-12p40 release appears to correlate positively, and in
a statistically signiﬁcant way, with MS disease severity as
measured by the Expanded Disability Status Scale (EDSS)
score [17]. It was shown that the mechanism of release of
pro-inﬂammatory cytokines, such as IL-1b, IL-6, or tumor

necrosis factor (TNF)-a, from PBMCs and microglial cells
from the CNS was mediated through engagement of CD14
and TLR4, which are pattern recognition receptors of pri-
mary importance to innate immunity. MSRV-Env appears
to also trigger a maturation process in human dendritic
cells and to endow these cells with the capacity to support a
T-helper-1 (Th1)-like type of T-helper cell differentiation
[15, 17]. It has been further shown that MSRV-Env induces
a concentration-dependent release of IL-6 and TNF-a by
human PBMCs in culture, with afﬁnities in the picomolar
or low nanomolar range (internal report).

In a study comparing the cytokine proﬁle of PBMCs
stimulated by MSRV-Env in samples from 30 patients with
RRMS (of whom 13 were presenting with a clinical relapse
and 17 others were in a stable clinical condition at the time
of blood collection), inﬂammatory cytokines, such as TNF-
a and IFN-c, were produced by cells from patients in a
relapse state, whereas the anti-inﬂammatory cytokine IL-10
was produced by the T lymphocytes and CD14? cells of
patients who were in a stable condition. These data suggest
a clinically correlated balance between patients’ immune
systems and the peripheral
to this
endogenous retroviral protein [18].

reactivity status

Beyond its potent agonist effects on native human TLR4,
MSRV-Env appears
superantigen-like effects
downstream from the innate immune activation [14, 19].

to exert

258

F. Curtin et al.

The ability of superantigens to cause antigen-independent
polyclonal activation of T lymphocytes can result
in
abnormal autoreactive T-cell activation [20] and oversecre-
tion of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines [21]. Superantigen
properties of bacterial or viral antigens have been suggested
as a causative factor in autoimmune diseases [22–24].
Nonetheless,
effect
appears to be dependent upon upstream TLR4 activation, as
it was no longer observed after blockade of TLR4 receptors
with an appropriate antibody, which resulted in inhibition of
both TNF-a [17] and IFN-c secretion (H. Perron, personal
communication).

the MSRV-Env superantigen-like

Addressing TLR4 expression in myelin-producing cells,
immunostaining and gene expression analyses evidenced
transient expression of TLR4 on oligodendroglial precursor
cells (OPCs) in human brain tissue and in culture. Cultured
primary OPCs were stimulated with MSRV-Env protein to
determine the effects of the ligand-receptor interaction in
such cells. It was shown that human and rat OPCs expressed
TLR4 in a window period preceding their differentiation. It
was then shown that MSRV-Env-mediated activation of
TLR4 led to release of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines and, via
inducible nitric oxide synthase, to release of nitric oxide
radicals. This caused formation of nitrotyrosine groups and
paralleled the subsequent blockade of myelin protein
expression. These observations showed that induction of
nitrosative stress by MSRV-Env through TLR4 signaling
inhibits oligodendroglial differentiation capacity, which
results in failure of remyelination by migrated OPCs—a
critical pathophysiological process
in MS [25]. This
remyelination failure is a pathophysiological mechanism of
particular importance for progressive forms of MS [26–31].
The ﬁndings regarding the OPC toxicity of MSRV-Env were
conﬁrmed independently (internal report).

Consequently, both the pro-inﬂammatory effect with
cytokine release and the oligodendrocyte toxicity induced
by MSRV-Env indicate that the MSRV-Env protein is a
key element in the pathophysiology of MS.

3 Pathophysiology

3.1 Expression in MS Lesions

Several studies have shown that the MSRV-Env protein is
systematically expressed in active MS brain lesions, where
the expression takes place in macrophages and microglial
cells [32–34], while there is no or only faint expression in
normal-appearing white matter from patients or control
subjects without MS. The level of immunostaining also
appears to correlate with the acute characteristics of the
brain lesions [32, 34], notably at the start of a lesion, as
shown in Fig. 2 [35].

In a study by Perron and Van Horssen [35], brain
samples from 20 patients with clinically diagnosed and
neuropathologically conﬁrmed MS, and from ten control
subjects without MS, were analyzed. Immunodetection of
speciﬁc proteins was done with speciﬁc antibodies to
MSRV-Env or GAG proteins, to proteolipid protein of
myelin, to human leukocyte antigen (HLA) class II anti-
gens, and to microglia, macrophage, and lymphocyte-
speciﬁc markers. Both MSRV proteins were detected in the
same cells in lesions from all MS brains (20/20), but only
rare and faint detection of MSRV-Env was seen in a few
control subjects or in normal-appearing white matter from
MS brains. MSRV-Env was strongly and essentially
expressed in perivascular macrophages and in brain
microglia, and this was particularly seen in actively
demyelinating areas and at all stages of MS plaques. It was
occasionally detected in astrocytes within lesions and was
only faintly detected in inactive (burnt-out) plaques with
diffuse staining retained on an extracellular matrix of
ﬁbrotic areas. Globally, MSRV-Env detection appears to be
associated with an active demyelination process, whatever
the stage of the MS disease is.

These different neuropathological studies show the
systematic presence of MSRV-Env protein in MS brain
lesions, from the earliest perivascular stage to the latest
active rim of microglia in progressive plaques—in partic-
ular linked to the demyelination process. This systematic
expression of such a protein with inﬂammatory and
myelinotoxic properties in lesions suggests that MSRV-
Env plays a key pathogenic role in the MS lesional process,
and makes it a highly relevant drug target. As it is present
in lesions of all types of MS—RRMS as well as progres-
sive forms—its potential role in the neurodegeneration
process suggests that the neutralization of this target could

Fig. 2 A new perivascular multiple sclerosis lesion is associated with
envelope protein (Env)-positive inﬁltrating perivascular macro-
phages, colored in brown by immunostaining [35]

Treatment Against Human Endogenous Retrovirus

259

be particularly valuable for treatment of progressive forms
of MS.

4 Therapeutics

4.1 Development of GNbAC1, a Monoclonal

Antibody

The above-described pathophysiological ﬁndings led to a
search for a speciﬁc MSRV-Env-antagonist drug, which
could speciﬁcally bind to this endogenous retroviral protein
and neutralize its pathogenic activity. A mAb was isolated,
which selectively binds to a linear epitope of the SU
domain of the MSRV-Env protein and neutralizes its TLR4
binding potential without interacting with this receptor.
Following murine and chimeric antibody versions, a
humanized recombinant antibody of the IgG4/j subclass,
called GNbAC1, was produced. Site-directed mutagenesis
within the corresponding encoding nucleotide sequence
was performed to stabilize the interchain disulﬁde bridges
of the core region of IgG4. GNbAC1 has a molecular
weight of approximately 147 kDa. Details of the discovery
and preclinical development of GNbAC1 have been
described by Curtin et al. [36].

4.2 In Vitro Evidence

GNbAC1 was tested in vitro for its ability to block the
release of pro-inﬂammatory cytokines induced by MSRV-
Env. It was shown that release of TNF-a by PBMCs
stimulated by MSRV-Env was inhibited by GNbAC1, but
that GNbAC1 did not suppress PBMC activation by
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a TLR4 agonist: this showed
that the mode of action of GNbAC1 is speciﬁc to the target
and does not involve any TLR4 inhibition [17]. The neu-
tralizing activity of GNbAC1 does not interfere with the
receptor, neither by itself nor when it is bound to the target
epitope on its anti-ligand.

Another study used HEK-BlueTM human TLR4 cells
designed for studying the stimulation of
recombinant
human TLR4 by monitoring the activation of nuclear factor
(NF)-jB and activator protein (AP)-1. In this model, it was
conﬁrmed that MSRV-Env induces strong and highly
potent TLR4 activation (with a half-maximal effective
concentration [EC50] in the picomolar range). It was further
shown that
is signiﬁcantly and
concentration-dependently inhibited by GNbAC1 but not
by corresponding GNbAC1 vehicle or another control mAb
(internal report).

the MSRV-Env effect

In a recent study [37], the in vitro effect of GNbAC1 on
OPCs was tested. It was shown that GNbAC1 signiﬁcantly
diminished the induction of nitrosative stress due to

MSRV-Env in OPCs and allowed rescue of the expression
of myelin proteins by differentiated OPCs, which are
reduced by MSRV-Env. This additional effect on glial cell
pathology therefore indicates that GNbAC1 can provide a
protective effect on OPCs, and this suggests the potential to
prevent the defect in remyelination associated with MS
lesions [38]. In this experiment, GNbAC1 also decreased
pro-inﬂammatory cytokines—notably TNFa, which is
known to induce myelin and oligodendroglial damage [39].
These ﬁndings indicate that GNbAC1 can display a double
therapeutic effect, protecting OPC differentiation capacity
and inhibiting the pro-inﬂammatory signaling cascades
induced by MSRV-Env in the CNS.

4.3 In Vivo Evidence

Assessment of the therapeutic efﬁcacy of the different
forms of GNbAC1 was assessed in an MSRV-Env exper-
imental allergic encephalitis (EAE) mouse model [16]. The
results of the inhibition of MSRV-Env effects in the EAE
model were described by Curtin et al. [36]. It was shown
that a reversal of clinical score kinetics toward healing was
observed in all animal groups treated with GNbAC1 or
other chimeric human isotypes binding to the same epitope.
In those experiments, some untreated animals died or had
to be euthanized because of complete paralysis after
4 weeks, while all of the GNbAC1-treated mice survived.
In another experiment in an EAE model in severe com-
bined immunodeﬁciency (SCID) mice, after several weeks
post-treatment with a chimeric human antibody similar to
GNbAC1, it was possible to observe remyelination tracts in
CNS lesions, such as those shown in Fig. 3 [40].

These results support the concept that GNbAC1 could
the

be an efﬁcacious treatment

for MS.

In addition,

Fig. 3 Signs of remyelination in experimental allergic encephalitis
mouse brain lesions after treatment with chimeric human antibodies
similar to GNbAC1, observed with 20,30-cyclic-nucleotide 30-phos-
phodiesterase (CNPase) labeling with a speciﬁc monoclonal antibody
[40]

260

F. Curtin et al.

observation of remyelination in mice conﬁrms the data
obtained in vitro with OPCs. These results suggest that
GNbAC1 could be of particular interest for treatment and
prevention of demyelination and axonal death, as are par-
ticularly observed in progressive forms of MS.

4.4 Early Clinical Testing

A phase I, ﬁrst-in-man clinical study, performed in a
double-blind, placebo-controlled, dose-escalating titration
design, enrolled 33 healthy subjects who did not express
the MSRV-Env target. In dose cohort 0 at a dose of
0.0025 mg/kg,
three subjects received an intravenous
GNbAC1 infusion and one subject received a placebo. In
dose cohort 1 at a dose of 0.025 mg/kg, four subjects
received an intravenous GNbAC1 infusion and one subject
received a placebo. For the following four dose cohorts
(receiving respective doses of 0.15, 0.6, 2, or 6 mg/kg),
four subjects received GNbAC1 intravenously and two
subjects received a placebo in a sequential manner. All 33
healthy subjects received the scheduled injections. In that
study, the safety proﬁle of GNbAC1 appeared favorable
without infusion reactions or serious adverse events. There
was no evidence of induction of anti-drug antibodies. The
single-administration pharmacokinetics were in line with
those expected for normal IgG, with apparent dose-linear
pharmacokinetics
of
19–26 days [41].

elimination

half-life

and

an

A phase IIa study was performed as a single-blind,
placebo-controlled, dose-escalating randomized study in
ten MS patients: one had RRMS, three had PPMS, and six
had SPMS. In each of two dose cohorts (2 and 6 mg/kg),
four patients received GNbAC1 and one patient received a
placebo (randomization ratio 4:1) in a sequential manner.
Then, the patients entered a repeated-dose extension study,
where all ten patients received GNbAC1 in an open-label
setting for 11 additional intravenous infusions on a 4-week
administration schedule. Eight of them remained in the
study until the study end. In that study, the safety proﬁle of
GNbAC1 was also favorable, and no particular trends
toward speciﬁc types of adverse events were observed; in
particular, no hypersensitivity or infusion reactions were
observed. The two dropouts were not related to safety
events [42, 43]. A pharmacodynamic response with a sta-
tistically signiﬁcant decline in MSRV-Env biomarkers was
observed (see below) [42]. Repeated-dosing pharmacoki-
netics conﬁrmed the initial observation of the phase I
study, with dose-linear pharmacokinetics and an accumu-
lation factor of about 3 [43]. No anti-drug antibodies were
detected during the whole duration of the study. An
experiment
involving immunomonitoring of monocytes
and T cells in the ten enrolled patients and matched healthy
control subjects showed that administration of GNbAC1

did not lead to a decrease in the T-cell response to viral
antigens and did not impact TLR4 activation by LPS,
supporting the expected mechanism of action of GNbAC1
[44]. Blood levels of IL-6, TNF-a, and IFN-c were moni-
tored during the treatment, and no consistent changes were
observed during the treatment.

Interestingly, from a clinical and brain-imaging per-
spective, the MS patients remained stable over 1 year of
treatment [42, 43]. The open-label setting and the small
sample size somewhat limited the conclusions that could be
drawn; however, these results suggested that there was a
pharmacodynamic response to GNbAC1 in line with the
expected mechanism of action of the mAb.

5 Biomarkers

5.1 MSRV Biomarker Prevalence

Different studies in MS patients and control populations
have shown that MSRV expression, assessed by RNA
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in blood as well as in
cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF), is more prevalent in MS patients
than in control populations.

In a preliminary study [45] analyzing sera from MS
patients and control subjects, MSRV RNA was detected in
nine of 17 patients with MS; a negative association
between MS therapy and RNA expression was observed. A
positive RNA detection was noted in three of 36 apparently
healthy control subjects and in none of eight patients with
non-neurological disorders.

In a European multicenter study reported by Arru et al.
[46], the presence of MSRV, identiﬁed by the pol gene,
using RNA PCR quantiﬁcation, was more frequent and the
viral load was greater, with a prevalence of 71 % in plasma
from 147 MS patients, compared with 17 % in plasma from
98 healthy control subjects (17 %) and 40 % in plasma
from 57 patients with other inﬂammatory and non-inﬂam-
matory neurological diseases, some of whom suffered from
chronic inﬂammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropa-
thy (CIDP) which also appears to be associated with
expression of MSRV [34]. In another study [47], blood and
CSF from 113 Sardinian patients with MS and neurological
control subjects were analyzed by PCR. MSRV positivity
was detected in the CSF of 50 % of the MS patients at
clinical onset—increasing to about 90 % in those with
RRMS and 100 % in those with SPMS with temporal
disease progression—and in 40 % of patients with other
neurological diseases (MSRV was positive in 50 % of
patients with CNS inﬂammatory disease and in 33.3 % of
patients with non-CNS inﬂammatory disease). In blood,
MSRV was detected in 100 % of MS patients, 63 % of
patients with inﬂammatory neurological diseases (four of

Treatment Against Human Endogenous Retrovirus

261

diseases

chronic

(n = 28),

ﬁve patients with inﬂammatory CNS diseases, three of four
patients with inﬂammatory peripheral neuropathy, and
neither of two patients with myasthenia gravis), and 13 %
of healthy blood donors. In a study by Perron et al. [34],
199 healthy control subjects and control subjects with other
neurological
infections
(n = 30), or autoimmunity (n = 30) were analyzed with an
immunoassay detecting MSRV-Env protein in serum.
MSRV-Env RNA or DNA copy numbers in PBMCs were
also determined by quantitative PCR. RNA expression in
PBMCs and DNA copy numbers were signiﬁcantly ele-
vated in patients with MS versus healthy control subjects
(p \ 0.001). In patients with MS, DNA copy numbers were
greater in those with chronic progressive MS than in
RRMS patients. This observation was reproduced inde-
pendently by two other studies [48, 49].

All of these results show that MSRV-related biomark-
ers—in particular those related to MSRV-Env (RNA,
DNA, or proteins)—are more prevalent in patients with MS
than in healthy control subjects. The sensitivity and
speciﬁcity of these biomarkers are high; however, as the
measurement techniques used in the different studies were
not standardized (i.e., as the analytical validity has not been
established), no attempts were made to establish the
deﬁnitive clinical validity (i.e., establishing a receiver
operating characteristic [ROC] curve based on the sensi-
tivity and speciﬁcity of the test as a function of deﬁned cut-
off points).

5.2 MSRV Elements as a Prognostic Factor

Interestingly, expression of MSRV biomarkers could have
prognostic value for the evolution of MS. The original
ﬁndings come from a longitudinal cohort study performed
in Sardinia, Italy. Following a preliminary study, which
showed that the presence of MSRV-Pol RNA in the CSF of
early MS patients was indicative of a poor 3-year follow-up
prognosis [50], a long-term longitudinal observational
study was launched: at study entry, 18 of 23 patients could
be categorized according to MSRV-Pol status in their CSF,
assessed with nested PCR: ten were MSRV positive and
eight were MSRV negative; both groups were of a similar
mean age and had similar EDSS scores (1.9–2.1) at study
entry. A 6-year follow-up study showed that the mean
EDSS scores differed between the MSRV-positive and
MSRV-negative cohorts (4.3 versus 2.2; p = 0.004) in a
statistically signiﬁcant way, and that the annual relapse rate
was higher in MSRV-Pol-positive patients (0.5 versus 0.3
in MSRV-Pol-negative patients; p = 0.01) [51]. The same
cohort was followed up for 10 years [52], and the results
showed that MSRV-Pol-positive patients had a statistically
signiﬁcantly higher average EDSS score (6.2) than MSRV-
Pol negative patients (3.3). When the patients were

dichotomized on the basis of an EDSS score higher than 5,
88 % of MSRV-Pol-positive patients had an EDSS score
higher than 5, while only 12 % of MSRV-Pol-negative
patients did (Fisher’s exact test p \ 0.0004). In addition,
six of 14 MSRV-Pol-positive patients (42 %) had con-
verted to SPMS, whereas no MSRV-Pol negative patients
had converted (Fisher exact test p \ 0.01). These data
suggest that the MSRV-Pol biomarker in the CSF may
indicate a more severe course of MS disease and a higher
risk of conversion to SPMS. This was a small study, which
certainly deserves conﬁrmation with larger cohorts, with
adjustment for concomitant MS treatments—in particular
to conﬁrm the positive predictive value (PPV) and negative
predictive value (NPV) of the biomarker detection for
conversion to SPMS and especially within which time-
frame. If clinical validity for prognosis were to be con-
ﬁrmed, this biomarker could be of real importance for the
therapeutic approach used for patients at the onset of the
disease.

Interestingly, in the patient cohort of the phase IIa study
of GNbAC1 [42, 43], the level of MSRV-Env RNA pre-
sented a trend toward an inverse correlation (Pearson’s
r value -0.55, p = 0.12) with the duration of the MS
disease before the start of the trial (unpublished GeNeuro
data on ﬁle) in nine patients. This observation also requires
conﬁrmation but can be put in parallel with ﬁndings from a
large transverse study in Spain, including 178 MS patients
and 124 control subjects, where it was observed that the
MSRV-Env DNA load was signiﬁcantly associated with a
higher EDSS score and a higher Multiple Sclerosis Severity
Score (MSSS) in women [49]—the latter score also taking
into consideration the speed of the evolution [53].

5.3 MSRV as a Predictor of Response

In the MS study in 10 patients, MSRV-Env and MSRV-Pol
transcripts obtained from PBMCs were analyzed at base-
line and at regular intervals: the distributions of MSRV
transcript levels at inclusion were homogeneous in both
cohorts. Figure 4, adapted from Derfuss et al. [42], presents
measurements of MSRV-Env and MSRV-Pol messenger
RNA (mRNA) transcripts relative to GUS-B gene expres-
sion before the ﬁrst, third, and sixth GNbAC1 adminis-
trations. Decreases
and MSRV-Pol
transcript levels at 3 months and at 6 months of treatment
were observed. These ﬁndings were not expected, as
GNbAC1 neutralizes the MSRV-Env protein only when
binding to its target peptidic epitope and does not target
RNA, nor is it known to interfere with a molecule acti-
vating proviruses from the related HERV-W family. At
6 months,
the differences were statistically signiﬁcant
(repeated-measures analysis of variance [ANOVA] on
MSRV-Env: p = 0.029; on MSRV-Pol: p = 0.044) [42].

in MSRV-Env

262

Fig. 4 Multiple sclerosis–
associated retrovirus (MSRV)
envelope protein (Env) and
polymerase (Pol) transcript
expression proportional to a
reference glucuronidase, beta
(GUS B) gene transcript, before
the ﬁrst, third, and sixth
administrations of GNbAC1.
Adapted from Derfuss et al. [42]

MSRV-Env

MSRV-Pol

F. Curtin et al.

e
v
i
t

l

a
e
r
 
v
n
E
V
R
S
M

-

/

 

B
S
U
G
n
o
s
s
e
r
p
x
e

i

0.10

0.05

0.00

*

6

1

3

administration N°

e
v
i
t

/

 

B
S
U
G
n
o
s
s
e
r
p
x
e

i

l

a
e
r
 
l

-

o
P
V
R
S
M

0.015

0.010

0.005

0.000

*

6

1

3

administration N°

This pharmacodynamic response shows an effect not only
on the target itself but also on the endogenous retroviral
transcriptional activity associated with MSRV-Env protein
expression. This suggests that neutralization of the MSRV-
Env protein would also downregulate expression of the
corresponding endogenous
retroviral genome(s). This
observation is of particular interest, as two reference MS
treatments induce similar responses at the level of MSRV-
Env transcripts. In an Italian longitudinal study, which
included 11 RRMS patients, IFN-b induced a decrease in
MSRV-Env RNA measured by reverse transcriptase (RT)-
PCR, which was observed at 3 months and persisted at
follow-up at 12 months. Incidentally, one patient, who was
non-responder to IFN-b and had progression of his disease,
presented with an increase in MSRV-Env levels after an
initial decrease [54]. In another study in 22 RRMS patients,
it was shown that natalizumab induced a decrease in MSRV-
Env mRNA, measured by RT-PCR, observed later after
6 months of
treatment. This effect was maintained at
12 months of treatment in all patients who were all clinically
stable over this period [55]. The pharmacodynamic response
observed with GNbAC1, paralleling the response observed
with the MS treatments natalizumab and IFN-b, was sug-
gestive of the potential therapeutic effect of GNbAC1. In
addition, it suggested that MSRV-Env RNA measurement is
an interesting tool for monitoring the response to treatment,
which could be used for adjustment of MS treatment in
terms of the dose, schedule or duration—typical speciﬁcities
of a companion diagnostic [56, 57].

Apart from one patient in a study performed by Mameli
et al. [54], where an increase in the MSRV biomarker was
associated with treatment failure, it is unclear whether the
level of the biomarker response correlates with endpoints
of efﬁcacy, as the above-mentioned studies were not
powered or designed to allow a comparison between the
magnitude of the biomarker response and the clinical
response. Exploration of these markers in a future phase II
efﬁcacy trial of GNbAC1 should allow assessment of
whether these MSRV markers could be predictors of
therapeutic responses to treatment and whether they would
correlate with clinical endpoints.

5.4 Further Clinical Development

Following the results of the phase I and phase IIa studies
showing good safety proﬁles and initial pharmacodynamic
responses, there is a need to further assess GNbAC1 efﬁ-
cacy in a phase IIb study. There are current plans to launch
a double-blind, placebo-controlled study in patients with
RRMS and to base the efﬁcacy evaluation of the drug on
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain, as this is
currently considered an acceptable endpoint for explora-
tory studies in regulatory guidelines on MS drug devel-
opment [58]. The study should be launched soon. The
assessment of MSRV-related biomarkers in a parallel
development with GNbAC1 is envisaged from a person-
alized medicine perspective. According to the results
already cited [42, 54, 55], MSRV biomarkers could allow
monitoring of a pharmacodynamic response to MS treat-
ments, although the clinical correlation of this observation
remains unknown. It
is unclear whether the status of
MSRV biomarkers at baseline will be predictive of a given
response to GNbAC1 and, in particular, its magnitude. As
described in the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
guideline [57], one of the purposes of a companion diag-
nostic is to identify patients who are most likely to have the
best beneﬁt-to-risk proﬁle with a therapeutic product. This
is one of the questions that the future clinical development
of GNbAC1 will address.

6 Discussion

The mAb GNbAC1 is the ﬁrst therapeutic product devel-
oped as an antagonist of a protein of endogenous retroviral
origin from the HERV-W family, called MSRV-Env. In the
ﬁeld of MS, this is one of the rare therapeutic develop-
ments whose aim is to neutralize a target considered as
being directly involved in the pathophysiological cascade
of MS. This differs from the vast majority of registered
drugs or those in development, which are trying to control
the disease by a modulatory or suppressing action on the
immune system [7, 59]. The MSRV-Env target
is

Treatment Against Human Endogenous Retrovirus

263

particularly interesting, as it appears to be closely associ-
ated with the evolution of the active pathological process
and has been found so far in all active regions of MS brain
plaques from different forms of MS. The target—expressed
on monocytes, B lymphocytes, and microglial cells—has a
pathophysiological effect associated with inﬂammation, as
well as neurodegeneration. The latter point is particularly
relevant for the chronic progressive forms of MS, where
neurodegeneration predominates, and where drugs pro-
moting or ‘‘unblocking’’ remyelination are particularly
needed [8], yet only a few are in early clinical develop-
ment. The results collected in various in vitro and in vivo
relevant models have shown that GNbAC1, by acting in the
periphery as well as within the CNS, may promote
remyelination in MS lesions while also acting on inﬂam-
mation—the two pathogenic pillars of MS. The high target
speciﬁcity expected with a mAb is also valuable in terms of
safety, as the MSRV-Env target is not known to play any
role in normal human physiology [60]. Initial clinical
studies have shown a favorable safety proﬁle for GNbAC1,
which has no negative impact on immunological function.
This is a clear advantage over current immunomodulators
used in MS, as long-term immunosuppression is a preoc-
cupying safety issue with these treatments [61]. Of course,
the safety proﬁle of GNbAC1 has to be reassessed and
conﬁrmed during further clinical development.

GNbAC1 is currently in early clinical development and
will soon enter a phase IIb study, in which the therapeutic
approach will be accompanied by a panel of RNA and/or
protein biomarkers directly related to the therapeutic target
protein and to the disease. The importance of biomarkers to
aid in the therapeutic choice and in optimal monitoring of
MS treatments has been highlighted recently in this journal
[62]—in particular because of heterogeneity in the clinical
and pathological phenotypes of the disease, highlighting the
need for panels of various biomarkers. MSRV-related
biomarkers appear to have some prognostic properties, at
least when they are measured in CSF; they are also markers
of the pharmacodynamic response for the ones measured in
PBMCs; however, these preliminary ﬁndings need to be
conﬁrmed in larger studies. Now, it should be investigated
whether these biomarkers could play a predictive role in the
therapeutic response to GNbAC1, and their potential role in
treatment monitoring should be evidenced to support a role
of companion diagnostics. If this role were to be conﬁrmed,
a personalized medicine approach could be envisaged for
GNbAC1 treatment. This would be all the more interesting
for MS as a chronic disorder, where patients must be treated
over the long term with minimal safety risks and optimal
long-term treatment compliance (see Gotovac et al. [63]).

There is accumulating evidence showing that endoge-
nous retroviruses of different families have a close asso-
ciation with the etiopathogeny of several disorders: beyond

MS, HERV-Env appears to also be associated with other
disorders, as data have now been obtained on an associa-
tion of HERV-W with schizophrenia [64], as well as with
CIDP [65], autoimmune disorders such as systemic lupus
erythematosus (associated with HTLV-1 related endoge-
nous sequence [HRES-1]) [66], rheumatoid arthritis (as-
sociated with HERV-K) [67, 68], amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (associated with HERV-K [69]), and Sjo¨gren
syndrome [70]. The GNbAC1 therapeutic development
program is the ﬁrst therapeutic development program—
and, so far, the only therapeutic development program—
the
speciﬁcally targeting a HERV-related target.
assumptions presented above are conﬁrmed,
this thera-
peutic approach could be a complete change of paradigm
not only for MS but for several ﬁelds of medicine.

If

Compliance with Ethical Standards

Conﬂict of interest disclosure All authors (F. Curtin, H. Perron, R.
Faucard, H. Porchet, and A. Lang) are employees and/or shareholders
of GeNeuro SA, Switzerland, and received funding from GeNeuro SA
for their work as employees.

References

1. McFarland HF, Martin R. Multiple sclerosis: a complicated pic-

ture of autoimmunity. Nat Immunol. 2007;8:913–9.

2. Sadiq SA. Multiple sclerosis. In: Rowland LP, editor. Merrit’s
neurology. Philadelphia: Lippincott, William & Wilkins; 2005.
p. 941–59.

3. Confavreux C, Vukusic S, Adeleine P. Early clinical predictors
and progression of irreversible disability in multiple sclerosis: an
amnesic process. Brain. 2003;126:770–82.

4. Pugliatti M, Rosati G, Carton H, Riise T, Drulovic J, Ve´csei L,
Milanov I. The epidemiology of multiple sclerosis in Europe. Eur
J Neurol. 2006;13:700–22.

5. Lassmann H, Bru¨ck W, Lucchinetti CF. The immunopathology of

multiple sclerosis: an overview. Brain Pathol. 2007;17:210–8.

6. Spain RI, Cameron MH, Bourdette D. Recent developments in

multiple sclerosis therapeutics. BMC Med. 2009;7:74.

7. Curtin F, Hartung HP. Novel therapeutic options for multiple

sclerosis. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2014;7:91–104.

8. Kremer D, Ku¨ry P, Dutta R. Promoting remyelination in multiple
sclerosis: current drugs and future prospects. Mult Scler.
2015;21:541–9.

9. Voisset C, Blancher A, Perron H, Mandrand B, Mallet F,
Paranhos-Baccala G. Phylogeny of a novel family of human
endogenous retrovirus sequences, HERV-W, in humans and other
primates. AIDS Res Hum Retroviruses. 1999;15:1529–33.

10. Belshaw R, Pereira V, Katzourakis A, Talbot G, Paces J, Burt A,
Tristem M. Long-term reinfection of the human genome by endoge-
nous retroviruses. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2004;101:4894–9.

11. Weiss RA. The discovery of endogenous retroviruses. Retrovi-

rology. 2006;3:67.

12. Volkman HE, Stetson DB. The enemy within: endogenous
Immunol.

disease. Nat

retroelements
2014;15:415–22.

and

autoimmune

13. Feschotte C, Gilbert C. Endogenous viruses: insights into viral
evolution and impact on host biology. Nat Rev Genet.
2012;13:283–96.

264

F. Curtin et al.

14. Perron H, Jouvin-Marche E, Michel M, Ounanian-Paraz A,
Camelo S, Dumon A, Jolivet-Reynaud C, Marcel F, Souillet Y,
Borel E, Gebuhrer L, Santoro L, Marcel S, Seigneurin JM,
Marche PN, Lafon M. Multiple sclerosis retrovirus particles and
recombinant envelope trigger an abnormal
immune response
in vitro, by inducing polyclonal Vbeta16 T-lymphocyte activa-
tion. Virology. 2001;287:321–32.

15. Rolland A, Jouvin-Marche E, Saresella M, Ferrante P, Cavaretta
R, Cre´ange A, Marche P, Perron H. Correlation between disease
severity and in vitro cytokine production mediated by MSRV
(multiple sclerosis associated retroviral element) envelope protein
in
J Neuroimmunol.
2005;160:195–203.

patients with multiple

sclerosis.

16. Perron H, Dougier-Reynaud HL, Lomparski C, Popa I, Firouzi R,
Bertrand JB, Marusic S, Portoukalian J, Jouvin-Marche E, Vil-
liers CL, Touraine JL, Marche PN. Human endogenous retrovirus
protein activates innate immunity and promotes experimental
allergic encephalomyelitis in mice. PLoS One. 2013;8:e80128.

17. Rolland A, Jouvin-Marche E, Viret C, Faure M, Perron H,
Marche PN. The envelope protein of a human endogenous
retrovirus-W family activates innate immunity through CD14/
Immunol.
TLR4
2006;176:7636–44.

promotes Th1-like

responses.

and

J

18. Saresella M, Rolland A, Marventano I, Cavarretta R, Caputo D,
Marche P, Perron H, Clerici M. Multiple sclerosis–associated
retroviral agent
(MSRV)-stimulated cytokine production in
patients with relapsing–remitting multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler.
2009;15:443–7.

19. Firouzi R, Rolland A, Michel M, Jouvin-Marche E, Hauw JJ,
Malcus-Vocanson C, Lazarini F, Gebuhrer L, Seigneurin JM,
Touraine JL, Sanhadji K, Marche PN, Perron H. Multiple scle-
rosis–associated retrovirus particles cause T lymphocyte-depen-
dent death with brain hemorrhage in humanized SCID mice
model. J Neurovirol. 2003;9:79–93.

20. Zhang J, Vandevyver C, Stinissen P, Mertens N, van den Berg-
Loonen E, Raus J. Activation and clonal expansion of human
myelin basic protein-reactive T cells by bacterial superantigens.
J Autoimmun. 1995;8:615–32.

21. Arad G, Levy R, Hillman D, Kaempfer R. Superantigen antag-
onist protects against lethal shock and deﬁnes a new domain for
T-cell activation. Nat Med. 2000;6:414–21.

22. Wucherpfennig KW. Mechanisms for the induction of autoim-
munity by infectious agents. J Clin Invest. 2001;108:1097–104.
23. Sfriso P, Ghirardello A, Botsios C, Tonon M, Zen M, Bassi N,
Bassetto F, Doria A. Infections and autoimmunity: the multi-
faceted relationship. J Leukoc Biol. 2010;87:385–95.

24. Delogu LG, Deidda S, Delitala G, Manetti R. Infectious diseases

and autoimmunity. J Infect Dev Ctries. 2011;5:679–87.

25. Kremer D, Schichel T, Fo¨rster M, Tzekova N, Bernard C, van der
Valk P, van Horssen J, Hartung HP, Perron H, Ku¨ry P. Human
endogenous retrovirus type W envelope protein inhibits oligo-
dendroglial
differentiation. Ann Neurol.
2013;74:721–32.

precursor

cell

26. Reynolds R, Dawson M, Papadopoulos D, Polito A, Di Bello IC,
Pham-Dinh D, Levine J. The response of NG2-expressing
oligodendrocyte progenitors to demyelination in MOG-EAE and
MS. J Neurocytol. 2002;31:523–36.

27. Polito A, Reynolds R. NG2-expressing cells as oligodendrocyte
progenitors in the normal and demyelinated adult central nervous
system. J Anat. 2005;207:707–16.

28. Baumann N, Pham-Dinh D. Biology of oligodendrocyte and
myelin in the mammalian central nervous system. Physiol Rev.
2001;81:871–927.

29. Bru¨ck W, Kuhlmann T, Stadelmann C. Remyelination in multiple

sclerosis. J Neurol Sci. 2003;206:181–5.

30. Aharoni R, Herschkovitz A, Eilam R, Blumberg-Hazan M, Sela
M, Bruck W, Arnon R. Demyelination arrest and remyelination
induced by glatiramer
experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA.
2008;105:11358–63.

treatment of

acetate

31. Keough MB, Yong VW. Remyelination therapy for multiple

sclerosis. Neurotherapeutics. 2013;10:44–54.

32. Antony JM, van Marle G, Opii W, Butterﬁeld DA, Mallet F,
Yong VW, Wallace JL, Deacon RM, Warren K, Power C. Human
endogenous retrovirus glycoprotein-mediated induction of redox
reactants causes oligodendrocyte death and demyelination. Nat
Neurosci. 2004;7:1088–95.

33. Perron H, Lazarini F, Ruprecht K, Pe´choux-Longin C, Seilhean
D, Sazdovitch V, Cre´ange A, Battail-Poirot N, Sibaı¨ G, Santoro
L, Jolivet M, Darlix JL, Rieckmann P, Arzberger T, Hauw JJ,
Lassmann H. Human endogenous retrovirus (HERV)-W ENV
and GAG proteins: physiological expression in human brain and
pathophysiological modulation in multiple sclerosis lesions.
J Neurovirol. 2005;11:23–33.

34. Perron H, Germi R, Bernard C, Garcia-Montojo M, Deluen C,
Farinelli L, Faucard R, Veas F, Stefas I, Fabriek BO, Van-
Horssen J, Van-der-Valk P, Gerdil C, Mancuso R, Saresella M,
Clerici M, Marcel S, Creange A, Cavaretta R, Caputo D, Arru G,
Morand P, Lang AB, Sotgiu S, Ruprecht K, Rieckmann P, Vil-
loslada P, Chofﬂon M, Boucraut J, Pelletier J, Hartung HP.
Human endogenous retrovirus type W envelope expression in
blood and brain cells provides new insights into multiple sclerosis
disease. Mult Scler. 2012;18:1721–36.

35. Perron H, Van Horssen J. HERV-W Env protein is strongly
upregulated in inﬂammatory multiple sclerosis lesions [poster no.
P355]. ECTRIMS Congress; Copenhagen; 2013.

36. Curtin F, Perron H, Kromminga A, Porchet H, Lang AB. Pre-
clinical and early clinical development of GNbAC1, a humanized
IgG4 monoclonal antibody targeting endogenous
retroviral
MSRV-Env protein. MAbs. 2015;7:265–75.

37. Kremer D, Fo¨rster M, Schichel T, Go¨ttle P, Hartung HP, Perron
H, Ku¨ry P. The neutralizing antibody GNbAC1 abrogates HERV-
W envelope protein-mediated
oligodendroglial maturation
blockade. Mult Scler. 2015;21:1200–3.

38. Piaton G, Williams A, Seilhean D, Lubetzki C. Remyelination in

multiple sclerosis. Prog Brain Res. 2009;175:453–64.

39. Bonora M, De Marchi E, Patergnani S, Suski JM, Celsi F, Bononi
A, Giorgi C, Marchi S, Rimessi A, Duszyn´ski J, Pozzan T,
Wieckowski MR, Pinton P. Tumor necrosis factor-a impairs
oligodendroglial differentiation through a mitochondria-depen-
dent process. Cell Death Differ. 2014;21:1198–208.

40. Perron H, Bertrand JB, Faucard R, Bernard C, Von Horssen J,
Firouzi R, Potoukalian J, Germi R, Garcia-Montojo M, Morand P,
Marche P, Sanhadji K, Tourraine JL, Lang A, Curtin F. Novel
humanized antibody therapy in multiple sclerosis targeting
immunopathogenic protein from endogenous retroviral element
while preserving hosts’
immune system [poster no. P470].
ECTRIMS Congress; Lyon; 2012.

41. Curtin F, Lang AB, Perron H, Laumonier M, Vidal V, Porchet
HC, Hartung HP. GNbAC1, a humanized monoclonal antibody
against
the envelope protein of multiple sclerosis–associated
endogenous retrovirus: a ﬁrst-in-humans randomized clinical
study. Clin Ther. 2012;34:2268–78.

42. Derfuss T, Curtin F, Guebelin C, Bridel C, Rasenack M, Matthey
A, Pasquier RD, Schluep M, Desmeules J, Lang AB, Perron H,
Faucard R, Porchet H, Hartung HP, Kappos L, Lalive PH. A
phase IIa randomised clinical study of GNbAC1, a humanised
monoclonal antibody against the envelope protein of multiple
sclerosis–associated endogenous retrovirus in multiple sclerosis
patients. Mult Scler. 2015;21:885–93.

Treatment Against Human Endogenous Retrovirus

265

43. Derfuss T, Curtin F, Guebelin C, Bridel C, Rasenack M, Matthey A,
Pasquier RD, Schluep M, Desmeules J, Lang AB, Perron H, Fau-
card R, Porchet H, Hartung HP, Kappos L, Lalive PH. A phase IIa
randomised clinical study of GNbAC1, a humanised monoclonal
antibody against the envelope protein of multiple sclerosis–asso-
ciated endogenous retrovirus in multiple sclerosis patients—a
12-month extension. J Neuroimmunol. 2015;285:68–70.

44. Zimmermann M, Sanderson N, Rasenack M, Lalive P, Curtin F,
Lang A, Kappos L, Derfuss T. Immunomonitoring of a phase II
study testing the monoclonal antibody GNbAC1 in multiple
sclerosis patients [poster no. P1011]. ECTRIMS Congress;
Copenhagen; 2013.

45. Garson JA, Tuke PW, Giraud P, Paranhos-Baccala G, Perron H.
Detection of virion-associated MSRV-RNA in serum of patients
with multiple sclerosis. Lancet. 1998;351:33.

46. Arru G, Mameli G, Astone V, Serra C, Huang YM, Link H,
Fainardi E, Castellazzi M, Granieri E, Fernandez M, Villoslada P,
Fois ML, Sanna A, Rosati G, Dolei A, Sotgiu S. Multiple scle-
rosis and HERV-W/MSRV: a multicentric study. Int J Biomed
Sci. 2007;3:292–7.

47. Dolei A, Serra C, Mameli G, Pugliatti M, Sechi G, Cirotto MC,
Rosati G, Sotgiu S. Multiple sclerosis–associated retrovirus
(MSRV) in Sardinian MS patients. Neurology. 2002;58:471–3.

48. Mameli G, Poddighe L, Astone V, Delogu G, Arru G, Sotgiu S,
Serra C, Dolei A. Novel reliable real-time PCR for differential
detection of MSRVenv and syncytin-1 in RNA and DNA from
patients with multiple sclerosis. J Virol Methods. 2009;161:98–106.
49. Garcia-Montojo M, Dominguez-Mozo M, Arias-Leal A, Garcia-
Martinez A´ , De las Heras V, Casanova I, Faucard R, Gehin N,
Madeira A, Arroyo R, Curtin F, Alvarez-Lafuente R, Perron H.
The DNA copy number of human endogenous retrovirus-W
(MSRV-type) is increased in multiple sclerosis patients and is
inﬂuenced by gender
severity. PLoS One.
2013;8(1):e53623.

and disease

50. Sotgiu S, Serra C, Mameli G, Pugliatti M, Rosati G, Arru G,
Dolei A. Multiple sclerosis–associated retrovirus and MS prog-
nosis: an observational study. Neurology. 2002;59:1071–3.

51. Sotgiu S, Arru G, Mameli G, Serra C, Pugliatti M, Rosati G,
Dolei A. Multiple sclerosis–associated retrovirus in early multi-
ple sclerosis: a six-year follow-up of a Sardinian cohort. Mult
Scler. 2006;12:698–703.

52. Sotgiu S, Mameli G, Serra C, Zarbo IR, Arru G, Dolei A. Mul-
tiple sclerosis–associated retrovirus and progressive disability of
multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler. 2010;16:1248–51.

53. Roxburgh RH, Seaman SR, Masterman T, Hensiek AE, Sawcer SJ,
Vukusic S, Achiti I, Confavreux C, Coustans M, le Page E, Edan
G, McDonnell GV, Hawkins S, Trojano M, Liguori M, Cocco E,
Marrosu MG, Tesser F, Leone MA, Weber A, Zipp F, Miterski B,
Epplen JT, Oturai A, Sørensen PS, Celius EG, Lara NT, Montalban
X, Villoslada P, Silva AM, Marta M, Leite I, Dubois B, Rubio J,
Butzkueven H, Kilpatrick T, Mycko MP, Selmaj KW, Rio ME, Sa´
M, Salemi G, Savettieri G, Hillert J, Compston DA. Multiple
sclerosis severity score: using disability and disease duration to
rate disease severity. Neurology. 2005;64:1144–51.

54. Mameli G, Serra C, Astone V, Castellazzi M, Poddighe L, Fai-
nardi E, Neri W, Granieri E, Dolei A. Inhibition of multiple-
sclerosis-associated retrovirus as biomarker of interferon therapy.
J Neurovirol. 2008;14:73–7.

55. Arru G, Leoni S, Pugliatti M, Mei A, Serra C, Delogu LG,
Manetti R, Dolei A, Sotgiu S, Mameli G. Natalizumab inhibits
the expression of human endogenous retroviruses of the W family
in multiple sclerosis patients: a longitudinal cohort study. Mult
Scler. 2014;20:174–82.

56. Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP).
issues associated with

Reﬂection paper on methodological

pharmacogenomic biomarkers in relation to clinical development and
patient selection. European Medicine Agency. 2011. http://www.ema.
europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Scientiﬁc_guideline/2011/
07/WC50010948672.pdf. Accessed 15 Jul 2015.

57. US Food and Drug Administration. In vitro companion diagnostic
devices: guidance for industry. US Food and Drug Administra-
tion.
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/medicaldevices/
deviceregulationandguidance/guidancedocuments/ucm262327.
pdf. Accessed 15 Jul 2015.

2014.

58. Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP).
Guideline on clinical investigation of medicinal products for the
treatment of multiple sclerosis. Euopean Medicines Agency. 2015.
http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Scientiﬁc_
guideline/2015/03/WC500185161.pdf. Accessed 15 Jul 2015.

59. Wingerchuk DM, Carter JL. Multiple sclerosis: current and
emerging disease-modifying therapies and treatment strategies.
Mayo Clin Proc. 2014;89:225–40.

60. Perron H, Lang A. The human endogenous retrovirus link
between genes and environment in multiple sclerosis and in
multifactorial diseases associating neuroinﬂammation. Clin Rev
Allergy Immunol. 2010;39:51–61.

61. Rommer PS, Zettl UK, Kieseier B, Hartung HP, Menge T,
Frohman E, Greenberg BM, Hemmer B, Stu¨ve O. Requirement
for safety monitoring for approved multiple sclerosis therapies:
an overview. Clin Exp Immunol. 2014;175:397–407.

62. Harris VK, Sadiq SA. Biomarkers of therapeutic response in multiple

sclerosis: current status. Mol Diagn Ther. 2014;18:605–17.

63. Gotovac K, Hajnsˇek S, Pasˇic´ MB, Pivac N, Borovecˇki F. Per-
sonalized medicine in neurodegenerative diseases: how far away?
Mol Diagn Ther. 2014;18:17–24.

64. Perron H, Hamdani N, Faucard R, Lajnef M, Jamain S, Daban-
Huard C, Sarrazin S, LeGuen E, Houenou J, Delavest M, Moins-
Teisserenc H, Bengoufa D, Yolken R, Madeira A, Garcia-Mon-
tojo M, Gehin N, Burgelin I, Ollagnier G, Bernard C, Dumaine A,
Henrion A, Gombert A, Le Dudal K, Charron D, Krishnamoorthy
R, Tamouza R, Leboyer M. Molecular characteristics of human
endogenous retrovirus type-W in schizophrenia and bipolar dis-
order. Transl Psychiatry. 2012;2:e201.

65. Faucard R, Madeira A, Panaite PA, Lesage C, Gehin N, Burgelin
I, Curtin F, Lang AB, Steck A, Perron H, Kuntzer T, Cre´ange A.
Multiple sclerosis associated retrovirus
(MSRV) envelope
expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells is associated
with CIDP [poster]. Saint-Malo: Peripheral Nerve Society
Meeting; 2013.

66. Perl A, Nagy G, Koncz A, Gergely P, Fernandez D, Doherty E,
Telarico T, Bonilla E, Phillips PE. Molecular mimicry and
immunomodulation by the HRES-1 endogenous retrovirus in
SLE. Autoimmunity. 2008;41:287–97.

67. Nelson PN, Roden D, Nevill A, Freimanis GL, Trela M, Ejtehadi
HD, Bowman S, Axford J, Veitch AM, Tugnet N, Rylance PB.
Rheumatoid arthritis is associated with IgG antibodies to human
endogenous retrovirus gag matrix: a potential pathogenic mech-
anism of disease? J Rheumatol. 2014;41:1952–60.

68. Tugnet N, Rylance P, Roden D, Trela M, Nelson P. Human
endogenous retroviruses (HERVs) and autoimmune rheumatic
disease: is there a link? Open Rheumatol J. 2013;7:13–21.

69. Douville R, Liu J, Rothstein J, Nath A. Identiﬁcation of active
loci of a human endogenous retrovirus in neurons of patients with
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol. 2011;69:141–51.

70. Sander DM, Szabo S, Gallaher WR, Deas JE, Thompson JJ, Cao
Y, Luo-Zhang H, Liu LG, Colmegna I, Koehler J, Espinoza LR,
Alexander SS, Hart DJ, Tom DM, Fermin CD, Jaspan JJ, Kula-
kosky PC, Tenenbaum SA, Wilson RB, Garry RF. Involvement
of human intracisternal A-type retroviral particles in autoimmu-
nity. Microsc Res Tech. 2005;68:222–34.

