Mol Neurobiol
DOI 10.1007/s12035-015-9355-3

Pathophysiological Roles of Cyclooxygenases
and Prostaglandins in the Central Nervous System

Tatsurou Yagami 1 & Hiromi Koma 1 & Yasuhiro Yamamoto 1

Received: 8 January 2015 /Accepted: 7 July 2015
# Springer Science+Business Media New York 2015

Abstract Cyclooxygenases (COXs) oxidize arachidonic acid
to prostaglandin (PG) G2 and H2 followed by PG synthases
that generates PGs and thromboxane (TX) A2. COXs are di-
vided into COX-1 and COX-2. In the central nervous system,
COX-1 is constitutively expressed in neurons, astrocytes, and
microglial cells. COX-2 is upregulated in these cells under
pathophysiological conditions. In hippocampal long-term po-
tentiation, COX-2, PGE synthase, and PGE2 are induced in
post-synaptic neurons. PGE2 acts pre-synaptic EP2 receptor,
generates cAMP, stimulates protein kinase A, modulates
voltage-dependent calcium channel, facilitates glutamatergic
synaptic transmission, and potentiates long-term plasticity.
PGD2, PGE2, and PGI2 exhibit neuroprotective effects via
Gs-coupled DP1, EP2/EP4, and IP receptors, respectively.
COX-2, PGD2, PGE2, PGF2α, and TXA2 are elevated in
stroke. COX-2 inhibitors exhibit neuroprotective effects
in vivo and in vitro models of stroke, Alzheimer’s disease,
Parkinson’s disease, multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis, epilepsy, and schizophrenia, suggesting neurotoxic-
ities of COX products. PGE2, PGF2α, and TXA2 can contrib-
ute to the neurodegeneration via EP1, FP, and TP receptors,
respectively, which are coupled with Gq, stimulate phospho-
lipase C and cleave phosphatidylinositol diphosphate to pro-
duce inositol triphosphate and diacylglycerol. Inositol triphos-
phate binds to inositol triphosphate receptor in endoplasmic
reticulum, releases calcium, and results in increasing intracel-
lular calcium concentrations. Diacylglycerol activates

calcium-dependent protein kinases. PGE2 disrupts Ca2+ ho-
meostasis by impairing Na+-Ca2+ exchange via EP1, resulting
in the excess Ca2+ accumulation. Neither PGE2, PGF2α, nor
TXA2 causes neuronal cell death by itself, suggesting that they
might enhance the ischemia-induced neurodegeneration.
Alternatively, PGE2 is non-enzymatically dehydrated to a
cyclopentenone PGA2, which induces neuronal cell death.
Although PGD2 induces neuronal apoptosis after a lag time,
neither DP1 nor DP2 is involved in the neurotoxicity. As well
as PGE2, PGD2 is non-enzymatically dehydrated to a
cyclopentenone 15-deoxy-Δ12,14-PGJ2, which induces neuro-
nal apoptosis without a lag time. However, neurotoxicities of
these cyclopentenones are independent of their receptors. The
COX-2 inhibitor inhibits both the anchorage-dependent and
anchorage-independent growth of glioma cell lines regardless
of COX-2 expression, suggesting that some COX-2-
independent mechanisms underlie the antineoplastic effect of
the inhibitor. PGE2 attenuates this antineoplastic effect, sug-
gesting that the predominant mechanism is COX-dependent.
COX-2 or EP1 inhibitors show anti-neoplastic effects. Thus,
our review presents evidences for pathophysiological roles of
cyclooxygenases and prostaglandins in the central nervous
system.

Keywords Cyclooxygenase . Prostaglandin . Thromboxane .
Cyclopentenone . Long-term potentiation . Stroke .
Alzheimer’s disease

* Tatsurou Yagami

yagami@himeji-du.ac.jp

1 Division of Physiology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Himeji

Dokkyo University, 2-1-7, kami-ohno, Himeji, Hyogo 670-8524,
Japan

Abbreviations
AA
Aβ
AC
AD

Arachidonic acid
Amyloid β protein
Adenylate cyclase
Alzheimer’s disease

AIDS
ALS
AMPA

Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-
isoxazolepropionic acid
Bipolar disorder

BD
CaMK II Calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II
CJD
CNS
COX
CRTH2

Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
Central nervous system
Cyclooxygenase
Chemoattractant receptor homologous
molecule expressed on Th2 cells
Cerebrospinal fluid
Cytosolic PGE synthase
Cytosolic phospholipase A2
15-deoxy-Δ12,14-PGJ2
Receptors for PGD2
Receptors for PGE2
Endoplasmic reticulum
Receptors for PGF2α

CSF
cPGES
cPLA2
15d-PGJ2
DP
EP
ER
FP
H-PGDS Hematopoietic PGD synthase
6-OHDA 6-Hydroxydopamine
IP
L-VDCC L-type voltage-dependent calcium channel
L-PGDS
LTP
L-VDCC L-type voltage-dependent Ca2+ channel
MAPK
MCA
mPGES Membrane-associated perinuclear PGE synthase
MPTP
MS
NMDA
NSAIDs
MPTP
MS
PD
PG
PPARγ
PLA2
PLC
PKC
PKA
sPLA2
SNpc
TP
TXA2
WT

1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine
Multiple sclerosis
N-methyl-D-aspartate
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
1-Methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine
Multiple sclerosis
Parkinson’s disease
Prostaglandin
Peroxysome proliferators-activated receptor γ
Phospholipase A2
Phospholipase C
Calcium-dependent protein kinase
cAMP-dependent protein kinase
Secreted phospholipase A2
Substantia nigra pars compacta
Receptors for TXA2
Thromboxane A2
Wild type

Receptors for PGI2

Lipocalin-type PGD synthase
Long-term potentiation

Mitogen-activated protein kinase
Middle cerebral artery

Background

Cyclooxygenases (COXs) catalyze the rate-limiting step in the
formation of prostaglandins (PGs) from arachidonic acid

Mol Neurobiol

Fig. 1 Arachidonic acids cascade. PLA2 liberates phospholipids and
generates AA. AA is metabolized to PGG2 and PGH2 by COX. PGH2
is metabolized to PGD2, PGF2, PGE2, PGI2, and TXA2 by each PG
synthase, respectively. Receptors for conventional PGs are coupled with
Gs, Gi, and Gq, which stimulates AC, inhibits the enzyme, and activates
PLCβ1, respectively. Gs-coupled receptors exhibit neuroprotectivity via
PKA, whereas Gq-coupled receptors do neurotoxicity via Ca2+ and PKC.
PGD2 are non-enzymatically metabolized to PGJ2, Δ12-PGJ2, and 15d-
PGJ2. 15d-PGJ2 acts as a neuroprotectant via its nuclear receptor PPARγ
and as a neurotoxicant via inhibiting proteasome

(AA) (Fig. 1). COXs are monotopic membrane proteins,
whose membrane-binding domain consists of a series of am-
phipathic α helices with several hydrophobic amino acids
exposed to an intracellular membrane monolayer. COXs are
classified into three isoforms: a constitutive form, COX-1, a
mitogen-inducible form, COX-2, and a variant of COX-1,
COX-3 [1, 2]. The human COX-1 consists of 599 amino acids
(calculated molecular mass [Mr]=68,686). The gene of COX-
1 maps to chromosome 9q32-q33.3 (Table 1). In the central
nervous system (CNS), COX-1 is expressed intensely in mi-
croglia as well as in hippocampal and cerebral cortical neurons
[3]. Although COX-3 mRNA is abundant in the cerebral cor-
tex, its enzymatic activity has not yet been reported. The hu-
man COX-2 consists of 604 amino acids (calculated molecu-
lar mass [Mr]=68,996). The gene of COX-2 maps to chromo-
some 1q25.2-q25.3 (Table 1). Unlike in most tissues,
Binducible^ COX-2 is also constitutively expressed in several
brain regions such as the cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and
amygdala [4]. The COX-2 gene is expressed throughout the
forebrain, with higher levels in the cerebral cortex and hippo-
campus in discrete populations of neurons, but not in glia [4].
COX-1 and COX-2 are localized at membranes of endoplas-
mic reticulum (ER) and microsome. Within neurons, COX-2
immunoreactivity is localized to post-synaptic sites and den-
dritic spines [5]. COXs form PGG2 and PGH2, which can be
metabolized by PG/TX synthases to five primary bioactive
prostainoids (Fig. 1): PGE2, PGF2α, PGD2, PGI2 (prostacy-
clin), and thromboxane A2 (TXA2). These prostanoids bind to
G protein-coupled receptors designated EP (receptors for
PGE2), FP, DP, IP, and TP, respectively, that differ in their

Mol Neurobiol

Table 1 Molecular profiles,
localization, and
pathophysiological expression of
brain COX

COX-1

COX-2

Length
Molecular mass
Chromosome
Subcellular location
Constitutive localization
Induction
LTP
Stroke
AD
PD
MS
ALS
Epilepsy
SCZ
BD
CJD
AIDS
Neoplasm

599 (1-12: signal peptide)
68,686
9q32-q33.3
Membrane (ER, microsome)
Neuron, astrocyte, microglia

Up (microglia)

Up (microglia)
Up
Up (glioma)

604 (1-17: signal peptide)
68,996
1q25.2-25.3
Membrane (ER, microsome)
Glutamatergic neuron (CTX, HPC, AMG) [4]
Neuron, astrocyte, microglia
Up (post-synaptic spine)
Up (neuron)
Up (neuron)
Up (neuron, microglia)
Up (oligodendrocyte, microglia)
Up (microglia)
Up (astrocyte)
Up (frontal CTX)
Up (prefrontal CTX)

Up (glioma, meningiomas)

This Table 1 illustrates molecular profiles of COXs in the brain. COXs are expressed in neurons, astrocytes,
oligodendrocytes, and microglial cells in physiological conditions and neurological diseases
CTX cerebral cortex, HPC hippocampus, AMG amygdala, LTP long-term potentiation, AD Alzheimer’s disease,
PD Parkinson’s disease, MS multiple sclerosis, ALS amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, SCZ schizophrenia, BD bipolar
disease, CJD Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, AIDS acquired immunodeficiency syndrome

effects on cAMP and/or phosphoinositol turnover and intra-
cellular Ca2+ mobilization [6]. Eicosanoids are divided into
two groups according to their mechanism of action: the con-
ventional prostanoids (e.g., PGD2 and PGE2) and the
cyclopentenone-type PGs (e.g., PGJ2 and PGA2.)

Pathophysiological Roles of COX in the CNS

In the CNS, COX-2 is constitutively expressed in hippocam-
pal and cortical glutamatergic neurons (Table 1), where it has a
pivotal role in long-term synaptic plasticity [5] and in the
neurovascular coupling during functional hyperemia [7].
COX-2 is upregulated and plays pathophysiological roles in
long-term potentiation (LTP), stroke, Alzheimer’s disease
(AD), Parkinson’s disease (PD), multiple sclerosis (MS),
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), epilepsy, schizophrenia
(SCH), bipolar disorder (BD), Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
(CJD), acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), and
neoplasm.

Long-Term Potentiation

LTP has been proposed as one of mechanisms for memory
formation. It is associated with amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-
4-isoxazole propionic acid (AMPA) receptors activation and

Fig. 2 Physiological roles of COX and PGE2 on the synaptic plasticity.
Calcium plays a well-defined role in the biochemical transduction of
signals from the synapse to the nucleus. In response to synaptic activity
and neurotransmitter release, extracellular calcium flows into the post-
synaptic cell through synaptic and extrasynaptic ligand-gated and volt-
age-dependent calcium channels. Major routes of entry with well-
established effects on nuclear gene expression are the NMDA receptor
(NMDAR). Calcium-permeable AMPA receptors (AMPAR) may play a
role at developing synapses or after the induction of synaptic plasticity.
Calcium signals can also be amplified by calcium-induced release of
calcium from intracellular stores, triggered by activation of inositol tri-
phosphate receptors (IP3R). Calcium at the mouth of the channel, in the
cytoplasm, or within the nucleus can signal to activity-dependent tran-
scription factors. Alterations in calcium influx into the post-synaptic cell
during development or as a result of mutation modulate the induction of
gene expression in response to neuronal activity. ER denotes endoplasmic
reticulum

release of AA [8]. Influx of calcium ions through N-methyl-D-
aspartate (NMDA) receptors into post-synaptic spine triggers
biochemical processes associated with LTP, which is believed
to underlie memory formation in the CNS including the hip-
pocampus and amygdala (Fig. 2). The increased calcium con-
centration in the spine activates key enzymes such as calcium/
calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CaMK II) [9] and
mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) [10]. AMPA re-
ceptors are activated by phosphorylation by CaMKII,
resulting in an increase of Ca2+ entry into post-synaptic neu-
rons. As shown in Table 1, expression of COX-2 is up-
regulated at the post-synaptic spine by a high-frequency stim-
ulation that is associated with LTP induction [4]. Selective
COX-2 inhibitors significantly reduce post-synaptic mem-
brane excitability, back-propagating dendritic action
potential-associated Ca2+ influx, and LTP induction in hippo-
campal dentate granule neurons, whereas a COX-1 inhibitor is
ineffective. All of these actions were effectively reversed by
exogenous application of PGE2 but not of PGD2 or PGF2α
[11]. Thus, COX-2-produced PGE2 in post-synapse potenti-
ates LTP via pre-synaptic EP2-PKA pathway.

Stroke

Ischemic and hemorrhagic strokes are associated with severe
functional disability and high mortality. About 5.5 million
people die from an ischemic stroke, rapidly progressing cere-
bral edema that compromises arterial inflow, culminating in
further ischemic damage [12]. Hemorrhagic stroke, while less
prevalent than ischemic stroke, is a devastating injury that
accounts for 15 % of strokes annually in the USA [13]. CNS
injury is often exacerbated, in part due to the robust
neuroinflammtory responses to extravasated blood and blood
products. Ischemia induces the elevated intracellular calcium,
excessive extracellular glutamate, free radicals, and inflamma-
tion, resulting in neurologic malfunctions and neuronal cell
death. As shown in Fig. 3, arachidonate cascade is involved
in the stroke [8]. Stroke has been studied in numerous animal
species. Mice and rats are the most commonly used species,
with a growing use of larger species, such as rabbits and even
nonhuman primates. The use of diverse experimental models
is useful for experimental studies on ischemia. Ischemia is
induced by several methods including craniotomy, arterial
embolism, and occlusion of three or four cervical vessels
[19]. Occlusion of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) is the
most commonly used surgical method of producing stroke.
By first damaging subcortical structures and then damaging
cortical structures,
this occlusion mimics human
striatocapsular infarcts in terms of size and the structures af-
fected [20]. A photochemically induced thrombotic MCA-
occluded rat is established as one of animal model for stroke
[21]. MCA occlusion up-regulates COX-2 in the brain of pa-
tients [22] and in vivo models [23] (Table 1). The cortical

Mol Neurobiol

Fig. 3 Arachidonate cascade in dementia. Mammalian sPLA2s generate
ROS, open L-VDCC, incorporates Ca2+ into neurons, and induces
neuronal apoptosis. The elevated level of intracellular calcium
concentration activates Ca2+-dependent enzymes such as cPLA2 and
PKC. Among COX products, PGD2, PGJ2, Δ12-PGJ2, and 15d-PGJ2
induces neuronal apoptosis. PGD2 can be transported extracellulary via
PGD2 transporter. A transient recruitment of cPLA2 to the NADPH
oxidase complex in plasma membrane [14], possibly because of a
relationship between the C2 domain of cPLA2 and the PX domain of
p47phox [15]. The role of cPLA2 in the Aβ-induced alteration of
mitochondrial dysfunction and apoptotic cell death [16]. Activation of
cPLA2 and release of AA may also lead to activation of the
sphingomyelinase-ceramide pathway, which in turn is involved in the
neurotoxic effects of Aβ [17]. As sphingomyelin is an important compo-
nent of the neural cell plasma membrane, the ability for Aβ to activate the
cPLA2/AA and sphingomyelinase pathways may offer an important ex-
planation for the cytotoxic effects of Aβ on synaptic impairment and
neuronal apoptosis [17]. Recent studies show an increase in
sphingomyelinase and acid ceramidase in the AD brain, suggesting that
deregulation of the sphingolipid metabolism is a part of AD pathology
[18]. Although these studies suggest a relationship between PLA2 and
other membrane lipids, more studies are needed to investigate how these
changes lead to the alteration of membrane physical properties and mem-
brane dynamics

secreted phospholipase A2 (sPLA2) is also induced in re-
sponse to focal cerebral ischemia [24–27]. sPLA2 activity is
elevated in the cortex, in which the ischemic core and the
penumbra coexist [24]. sPLA2-IB [24, 28] and sPLA2-IIA
[24, 29] induce neuronal apoptosis via L-type voltage-depen-
dent Ca2+ channel (L-VDCC) (Fig. 3).

In COX-1-deficient mice, resting cerebral blood flow is de-
creased [30], and brain ischemia/reperfusion injury is increased
[31]. In COX-2 deficient mice, susceptibility to ischemic injury
and NMDA neurotoxicity is reduced [31]. In the primary cul-
ture, neurons of homozygous COX-2 gene disrupted mice are
resistant to hypoxia compared to those of heterozygotes [32].
Overexpression of COX-2 exacerbates neuronal cell death un-
der both normoxia and hypoxia. After hypoxia, neuronal cell
death is exacerbated by PGE2, PGD2, or PGF2α, but not by
iloprost, a stable analog of PGI2. COX-2 is induced robustly
in neuronal cell bodies and dendrites in peri-infarct regions
during the acute phase of focal ischemic injury [33]. The
COX-2 selective inhibitor, NS-398, reduces infarct size

Mol Neurobiol

following focal ischemia [23]. Another COX-2 selective inhib-
itor, S-2474, rescues cortical neurons from undergoing sPLA2-
IIA-induced apoptosis [34]. COX-2 selective antagonists de-
crease the anoxia-induced neuronal cell death [32]. Thus,
COX-2 contributes to the neuronal cell death in ischemic stroke.

Alzheimer’s Disease

AD is characterized clinically by progressive dementia and
pathologically by cortical atrophy, neuronal loss, neurofibril-
lary tangles, senile plaques, and deposits of amyloid β protein
(Aβ) in the various regions of brain such as the cerebral cortex
and hippocampus [35] (Fig. 3). Aggregated deposits of Aβ are
generally assumed to have a causative role in neurodegenera-
tion and development of AD. Aβ is a 39- to 43-amino-acid
hydrophobic peptide and causes neuronal cell death in prima-
ry cultures [36]. Aβ-induced neuronal cell death is typified by
several characteristic features of apoptosis, such as formation
of cell surface blebs, chromatin condensation, and DNA frag-
mentation [37]. COX-1 is expressed in microglia surrounding
amyloid plaques in the AD brain [38] (Table 1). Neuronal
COX-2 is up-regulated in the CA1–CA4 subdivisions of the
hippocampal pyramidal layer of AD patients [39]. COX-2 is
also induced in neurons of transgenic mouse models for AD
[40] and Aβ-treated SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells [39].
COX-3 is expressed in AD and in the primary culture of hu-
man neural cells treated with IL-1β and Aβ42, suggesting
ancillary roles in membrane-based COX signaling or when
basal levels of COX-1 or COX-2 expression persist [41].

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) reduce the
risk of developing AD [42]. A 6-month, double-blind, placebo-
controlled study with indomethacin seems to protect AD pa-
tients from cognitive decline [43] and reduced levels of Aβ in
the hippocampus and cortex in a transgenic mouse model of AD
[44]. Aspirin is also associated with a reduced risk of AD in
humans [45]. The beneficial actions of NSAIDs have been
linked to their ability inhibit inducible COX-2 at sites of inflam-
mation and their side effects (e.g., gastric damage) to inhibition
of constitutive COX-1. COX-2 selective inhibitors, e.g., S-2474,
prevent cerebral cortical neurons from undergoing Aβ-induced
apoptosis [46]. The most recent trial of COX-2 inhibitors,
rofecoxive and naproxen, found no slowing of cognitive decline
in patients with mild to moderate AD over 12 months [40]. If
AD patients are optimally treated with COX-2 inhibitors, these
inhibitors can become useful therapeutic drugs for AD.

Parkinson’s Disease

PD is a neurodegenerative disease characterized by disabling
motor abnormalities, which include tremor, muscle stiffness,
paucity of voluntary movements, and postural instability [47].
Its main neuropathological feature is the loss of the
nigrostriatal dopamine containing neurons, whose cell bodies

are in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNpc) and nerve
terminals in the striatum. The main neurotoxin models to
study PD are based on the administration of a neurotoxin as
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) or 6-
hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA). COX-2 expression is induced
specifically within SNpc dopaminergic neurons in post-
mortem PD specimens and in the MPTP mouse model of
PD during the destruction of the nigrostriatal pathway [48].
The elevation of COX-2 occurs through a JNK/c-Jun-depen-
dent mechanism after MPTP administration (Table 1).
Inhibition of COX-2 by acetylsalicylic acid and salicylate pro-
vided neuroprotection in the MPTP model [49]. MPTP-
induced neurodegeneration is significantly protected in
COX-2-deficient mice [48, 50], suggesting therapeutic poten-
tial of COX-2 inhibitors for PD.

Multiple Sclerosis and Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis

MS is a chronic demyelinating disease of the CNS leading to
permanent cognitive and motor disabilities and characterized
by inflammation, demyelination, oligodendrocyte loss, and
axonal pathology [51]. COX-2 protein expression is also in-
creased in regions of active demyelination (Table 1) and co-
expressed mostly with markers of macrophages/microglia
[52], oligodendrocytes [53], and apoptosis [53]. In
cuprizone-induced demyelination, oligodendrocyte apoptosis
and a concomitant increase in the gene expression of COX-2
precede histological demyelination. COX-2 were expressed
by oligodendrocytes, suggesting a causative role for the
COX-2 pathway in the initiation of oligodendrocytes death
and demyelination. COX-2 gene deletion or chronic treatment
with the COX-2 selective inhibitor celecoxib reduced
cuprizone-induced oligodendrocytes apoptosis, the degree of
demyelination, and motor dysfunction [54].

ALS is a devastating neurodegenerative disease with the
progressive loss of motor neurons in ventral spinal cord and
motor cortex [55]. COX-2 is increased in activated microglial
cells/macrophages of the dorsolateral white matter of ALS
spinal cord [56] (Table 1). The strong upregulation of COX-
2 mRNA in ALS [57] is in accord with studies in the super-
oxide dismutase transgenic mouse model in which COX-2 up-
regulation occurs [58]. Celecoxib treatment significantly de-
layed the onset of weakness and weight loss and prolonged
survival by 25 %. Spinal cords of celecoxib-treated ALS mice
showed significant preservation of spinal neurons and dimin-
ished astrogliosis and microglial activation [59]. The up-
regulation of COX-2 in macrophages/microglia and oligoden-
drocytes can contribute to motor dysfunction.

Epilepsy

Epilepsy is a chronic neurological disorder characterized by
recurrent seizures and is frequently associated with

hippocampal neuronal loss, synaptic reorganization, and me-
sial temporal sclerosis [60]. The aberrant regulation of glial
functions can elicit seizures and promote epileptogenesis [61].
Glial abnormalities, including chronically activated astrocytes
and microglia, glial scars, and various gliomas, are likely to
form epileptic foci in the brain. COX-2 immunoreactivity in
temporal lobe epilepsy patient material in the absence of hip-
pocampal sclerosis is restricted to a few neurons of the hippo-
campus (Table 1). In the presence of hippocampal sclerosis,
on the other hand, astrocytic COX-2 immunoreactivity in the
CA1 subfield is significantly induced with a concomitant in-
crease in the steady-state level of COX-2 mRNA [62].

Blocking the seizure-induced increase in COX-2 function
with selective inhibitors such as rofecoxib reduces neuronal
death, suggesting neuroprotective effect of COX-2 inhibitors
[63]. A combination of pretreatment and post-treatment with
the non-selective COX inhibitor naproxen is neuroprotective
in an NMDA excitotoxicity model [64]. Even when neuropro-
tection is observed after COX-2 inhibition, selective COX-2
inhibitors do not prevent epileptogenesis or reduce the fre-
quency of spontaneous seizures in animal models of epilepsy
[65]. Although the COX-2 signaling cascade can be disease-
modifying, it is not required for epilepsy development [65].
Similarly, other studies demonstrate that inhibition of COX-2
with celecoxib after kainite-induced seizures provided no sig-
nificant improvement in neuronal damage or seizure activity
[66]. NS-398, a selective COX-2 inhibitor, administered re-
peatedly after kainate-induced seizures reduces hippocampal
cell death, and this effect was mimicked in COX-2 knockout
mice [67]. NS-398 can significantly reduce the size of an
NMDA-induced neocortical lesion [68]. Furthermore, the le-
sion produced by NMDA in COX-2 knockout mice is signif-
icantly smaller than that in wild-type mice. Astrocytic COX-2
appears to be associated with hippocampal neuronal loss in
epilepsy rather than epilepsy development.

Schizophrenia

Schizophrenia is a chronic and often debilitating illness that
affects approximately 1 % of the world’s population [69].
Cognitive deficits are a core feature of schizophrenia, involv-
ing abnormalities across the domains of memory, attention,
perception, and speed of processing. This disorder is consid-
ered to be the result of the interaction between multiple genetic
factors and environmental vulnerability. Genetic variation in
COX-2 is possibly involved in schizophrenia [70]. Protein and
mRNA levels of cPLA2, sPLA2, and COX are significantly
elevated in the post-mortem frontal cortex from schizophrenia
patients [71]. Protein and mRNA levels of COX-2 are signif-
icantly changed in schizophrenia as compared to controls
(Table 1). On the other hand, those of COX-1, mPGES,
cPGES, and 5-, 12-, 15-lipoxygenase are not significantly
different between groups. A therapeutic effect of celecoxib

Mol Neurobiol

have been reported in a prospective, randomized, double-
blind study of the COX-2 inhibitor celecoxib as an add-on to
risperidone in acute exacerbation of schizophrenia [72]. Two
meta-analyses have been published on this topic showing that
the use of COX-2 inhibitors in schizophrenia shows beneficial
effects [73], especially in early stages of the disease or in first
manifestations [74]. Since COX-2 inhibitors exhibit therapeu-
tic potential for schizophrenia, further studies are required to
clear how the up-regulation of COX-2 is involved in the path-
ogenesis of schizophrenia.

Bipolar Disorder

BD is characterized by recurring cycles of depressive and
manic symptoms or hypomanic symptoms. These symptoms
can be improved by mood stabilizers including lithium. In
post-mortem BD compared with control, COX-2 and
mPGES are significantly elevated in prefrontal cortex, while
levels of COX-1 and cPGES are reduced [75]. Aspirin given
to men undergoing coronary angiography reduces depression
and anxiety [76]. Celecoxib shows significant positive effects
as adjunctive therapy in BD patients experiencing depressive
or mixed episodes, and in depressed patients [77]. In the brain,
mood stabilizers reduce mRNA and protein of COX-2 and
activity of COX, but not those of COX-1 [78]. These thera-
peutic drugs also decrease concentration of PGE2. Thanks to
therapeutic potential of COX-2 inhibitors for BD, clinical tri-
als with aspirin in BD currently are underway.

Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease and Acquired
Immunodeficiency Syndrome

Coexpression of CD68 (phagocytic macrophages and
microglial cells) in COX-1-expressing cells is found in areas
of severe tissue damage and also around vacuoles in post-
mortem brains from patients with CJD [79]. In sporadic CJD
patients, high CSF levels of PGE2 were associated with short
survival [80], indicating that the inflammatory response is
correlated with the clinical outcome of the disease. Activated
COX-1-expressing microglia in CJD patients could account
for increased production of PGE2 and cytokines and might
contribute to the complex process of neurodegeneration.
Elevated levels of PGE2, PGF2α, and TXB2 have been found
in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of patient with HIV-
associated dementia and have been linked with the severity
of cognitive impairment. Because COX-1 mRNA is up-
regulated approximately twofold in HIV demented compared
with the non-demented patients, whereas COX-2 mRNA ex-
pression is unchanged, the increase in the PG levels is likely to
be selectively mediated by COX-1 [81]. In contrast to other
neurological diseases, COX-1 is up-regulated in CJD and
AIDS, but COX-2 is not altered. It has not been sufficiently
clarified how COX-1 is involved in the two diseases.

Mol Neurobiol

Neoplasm

Cancerous tumors in the brain can be divided into primary
tumors and metastasis tumors. The formers are originated in
the brain, and the latters are spread from other tissues besides
brain. Gliomas and other neuroepithelial tumors make up
49 % of primary brain tumors, and meningiomas are the sec-
ond most common primary brain tumor (27 %) [82]. Gliomas
are classified as astrocytomas, oligodendrogliomas, and
oligoastrocytomas on the basis of the phenotypical resem-
blance of tumor cells to normal glia (astrocytes or oligoden-
drocytes, or a combination of both). Gliomas and meningio-
mas are also found to overexpress COX compared with nor-
mal brain tissue (Table 1). Overexpression of both COX-1 and
COX-2 enzymes is documented in human gliomas. In astro-
cytic gliomas, COX-1 is predominantly expressed in
macrophages/microglial cells of the tumor mass, whereas
COX-2 expression is mostly found in tumor cells and in single
macrophages/microglial cells in perinecrotic areas [83].
Expression of COX-1 is higher in tumor cells of those patients
whose tumors have Bupgraded^ to a more malignant pheno-
type. The lower the COX-1 labeling score is, the longer both
survival and the time to tumor progression are [83]. COX-2
expression is also correlated with the pathological grade [84].
NS-398 reduces the proliferation of monolayer cell cultures,
as well as the growth of spheroids and tumor cell migration,
but not inhibit the tumor invasion in the coculture spheroid
system. The eicosanoid-related process is involved in menin-
gioma pathogenesis. Expression of COX-2 in meningiomas is
associated with cell proliferation or tumor grade. COX-2 ex-
pression is significantly stronger in the grade II meningiomas
than in grade I tumors [85]. Among the clinicopathologic
factors, age and COX-2 status are prognostic in progression-
free survival. Patients with moderate or strong COX-2 expres-
sion have worse outcome than those with negative or weak
COX-2 expression after controlling for potential confounders.
The molecular biomarker COX-2 has prognostic significance
in intracranial grades I–II meningiomas [85]. Thus, inhibitors
of both COX-1 and COX-2 possess therapeutic potential for
primary brain tumors. Since the oral administration of COX-1
inhibitor results in side effects on the gastrointestinal system,
the intravenous administration of COX inhibitors are expected
to beneficial effects for primary brain tumors.

Prostaglandins

PGH2 can be metabolized by various PG synthases to potent
biological PGs (Fig. 1). Earlier, it appeared that when cells
expressed large amounts of COX-2, the PGH2 formed could
be saturating for the PG synthase enzymes resulting in the
formation of proportionately larger amounts of PGE2 [86].
In addition to the cytosolic PGE synthase (cPGES), there is

an inducible microsomal or membrane-associated perinuclear
PGE synthase (mPGES) regulated, for instance, by proinflam-
matory cytokines and glucocorticoids. While the cytosolic
PGE synthase is principally coupled with COX-1, this induc-
ible mPGES appears coupled with COX-2 [87]. PGE2 is fur-
ther dehydrated to produce PGA2 [88].

Prostaglandin E2

PGE2 is produced from PGH2 by three enzymes: mPGES-1,
mPGES-2, and cPGES (Fig. 1). While the constitutive cPGES
is principally coupled with COX-1 [89], the inducible
mPGES-1 is coupled with COX-2 [90]. In contrast to
mPGES-1 and cPGES, mPGES-2 exhibits no isoform-
specific preference for PGE2 production [91]. mPGES-1 is
expressed in cortical and hippocampal neurons [92]. COX-2
and mPGES-1 are co-localized with PSD-95, a marker of
dendritic spines, and support a role for activity-dependent
COX-2/mPGES-1 production of PGE2 in synaptic plasticity
[93] (Table 2). mPGES-1 is induced in neurons and microglia
following transient forebrain ischemia in mice [94]. mPGES-1
is significantly elevated in neurons, microglia, and endothelial
cells of AD middle frontal gyrus. Although mPGES-1 is con-
sistently present in astrocytes of control tissue, it is present in
only some astrocytes of AD tissue [95].

PGE2 is a major product downstream of COX-2 enzymatic
activity and activates four distinct G-protein coupled recep-
tors, EP1–EP4 (Fig. 1). EP1 couples to Gq and simulates
phospholipase C (PLC). PLC cleaves phosphatidylinositol di-
phosphate (PIP2) to produce inositol triphosphate (IP3) and
diacylglycerol (DG). IP3 binds to IP3 receptor in the ER, re-
leases calcium from ER, and results in increased intracellular
calcium concentrations. DG activates calcium-dependent pro-
tein kinases (PKCs). EP2 and EP4 are coupled with Gs, stim-
ulate adenylate cyclase (AC), and increase the intracellular
cAMP. EP3 is coupled with Gi, inhibits AC, and suppresses
the cAMP formation. PGE2 regulates membrane excitability
and long-term synaptic plasticity in hippocampal perforant
path-dentate gyrus synapses [11] (Table 2). An EP2 agonist
mimics the PGE2 effect, whereas EP1 or EP3 agonist fails to
enhance the synaptic transmission both in hippocampal slices
and primary cultured neurons (Fig. 2). Both EP2 and EP4 are
associated with the Gs-cAMP-cAMP-dependent protein ki-
nases (PKA) pathway and are expressed in pre-synaptic ter-
minals [96]. Transiently silencing the EP2 gene eliminates the
PGE2-enhanced miniature synaptic activity, while inhibiting
the EP4 fails to prevent the PGE2-induced effect. The efficacy
of PGE2 in modulation of synaptic activity is dependent on the
activation of pre-synaptic EP2 [93]. PGE2 is produced at and
released from the postsynaptic site and acts as a retrograde
messenger in excitatory synaptic transmission via a pre-
synaptic EP2 [97]. Suppressing the EP2 gene results in an

Table 2 Pathophysiological
function of PGES, PGE2, and EP
in the CNS

PGES

Up: mPGES1 (HPC)
Up: mPGES1

PGE2

Up
Up

Up: mPGES1

Up: mPGES1
Up: mPGES1
Up: mPGES1
Up: mPGES1

Up (CSF) down (CTX)
Up
Up (CSF)
Up (SC)

Up (plasma)
Up (CSF)
Up (CSF)
Up (plasma)

LTP
Stroke

AD
PD
MS
ALS
Epilepsy
SCZ
CJD
AIDS
Neoplasm

Mol Neurobiol

EP

EP2 (pre-synapse)
EP1, EP3: neurotoxic EP2, EP4:

neuroprotective

EP2, EP4: neuroprotective

EP2: protective (oligodendrocyte)
EP2, EP3: neuroprotective
EP2 antagonists: anti-epilepsy

PGES, PGE2, and EP are induced in the brain, CSF, and plasma of patients with neurological diseases
HPC hippocampus, LTP long-term potentiation, AD Alzheimer’s disease, PD Parkinson’s disease, MS multiple
sclerosis, ALS amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, SCZ schizophrenia, CJD Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, AIDS acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome, CSF cerebrospinal fluid, SC spinal cord

abolishment of LTP in the visual cortex [97]. COX-2-derived
PGE2 in the facilitation of glutamatergic synaptic transmission
and LTP is mainly mediated via the EP2. Further studies are
required to clear how LTP is induced by the EP2-cAMP-PKA
pathway.

The level of PGE2 is elevated in the post-ischemic brain
[98]. PGE2 exhibits opposite effects as a neurotoxican [99]
and a neuroprotectant [100]. EP1 disrupts Ca2+ homeostasis
by impairing Na+-Ca2+ exchange, a key mechanism by which
neurons cope with excess Ca2+ accumulation after excitotoxic
insults (Fig. 4). Pharmacological inhibition or gene inactiva-
tion of EP1 ameliorates brain injury induced by excitotoxicity,
oxygen glucose deprivation, and MCA occlusion [99].
Although PGE2 have not yet been reported to induce neuronal
cell death by itself, its non-enzymatic metabolite, PGA2, alone
exhibits neurotoxicity [102].

Fig. 4 Neurotoxic and neuroprotective effects of PGE2 via EP1 and EP2/
EP4. PGE2 disrupts Ca2+ homeostasis by impairing NCX (Na+-Ca2+
exchange) via EP1. Phosphorylation of L-VDCC by PKA enhances L-
type Ca2+ currents by increasing the opening probability of individual
channels [101]

EP2 is abundantly expressed in the cerebral cortex, stria-
tum, and hippocampus [103]. EP2 mediates neuroprotection
in a cAMP-dependent manner [94]. In the transient focal is-
chemia model, mPGES-1 and COX-2 are co-localized in the
infarct region of the cortex (Table 2). NS-398 reduces not only
ischemic PGE2 production but also ischemic injuries in WT
mice, but not in mPGES-1 KO mice, which show less dys-
function than WT mice. Genetic deletion of EP2 significantly
increases cerebral infarction in cerebral cortex and subcortical
structures after the MCA occlusion-reperfusion. A selective
EP4 agonist reduces infarct volume and ameliorates long-
term behavioral deficits after ischemia [104]. EP4 is expressed
in neurons and markedly induced in endothelial cells after
ischemia-reperfusion. Conditional genetic inactivation of neu-
ronal EP4 worsens stroke outcome, consistent with an endog-
enous protective role of neuronal EP4 signaling in vivo.
Endothelial deletion of EP4 also worsens stroke injury and
decreases cerebral reperfusion. An EP4 agonist increases
levels of activated eNOS in cerebral microvessels, whereas
the effect is abolished by conditional deletion of endothelial
EP4. A selective EP3 agonist, ONO-AE-248, significantly
increases infarct size in the MCA occlusion model [105].
Pre-treatment with ONO-AE-248 exacerbates the acute
excitotoxicity of NMDA. Conversely, genetic deletion of
EP3 protects neurons against the toxicity of NMDA, suggest-
ing that PGE2 can contribute to the neurotoxicity of COX via
EP3.

PGE2 is increased in the CSF of living AD patients [106],
whereas PGE2 synthesis is reduced in the post-mortem cere-
bral cortexes of AD patients [107]. Among three PGES en-
zymes, only mPGES-1 is induced, and its expression is asso-
ciated with Aβ plaques in the cerebral cortex in human AD
patients and in a transgenic AD model. Deletion of mPGES-1

Mol Neurobiol

reduces the accumulation of microglia around senile plaques
and attenuates learning impairments in the AD model [108].
Aβ generates ROS [36] and causes neuronal apoptosis [109].
PGE2 rescues neurons from the toxicity of Aβ [110]. Agonists
for EP2 and EP4 prevent neurons from undergoing the Aβ-
induced ROS generation and neuronal cell death, while those
for EP1 and EP3 are not [111]. The PKA inhibitor significant-
ly attenuates the neuroprotection by an EP2 agonist, but not
that by an EP4 agonist, indicating that PGE2 can protect neu-
rons against Aβ toxicity by the EP2-cAMP-PKA pathway
(Fig. 4). Activation of microglia is a double-edged sword,
since it is neuroprotective by phagocytosing Aβ and neuro-
toxic by activating innate immunity that causes paracrine
damage to neurons. Ablation of EP2 in microglia enhances
the phagocytosis of Aβ without paracrine neurotoxicity [112].
Moreover, amyloid plaques are reduced in EP1-deleted AD
mice. Aβ-induced toxicity and Ca2+ response are also reduced
in EP1−/− neurons compared to control neurons in vitro
[113].

PGE2 of SN is higher in PD than those in AD or control
[114]. Microglial EP2 contributed to α-synuclein aggregation
and associated neurotoxicity as well as microglial activation.
In the MPTP model of PD, ventral midbrain PGE2 is princi-
pally originated from COX-1 without any change in COX-1
expression. The elevated level of PGE2 is ascribed to the ex-
pression of COX-2 during MPTP-induced neurodegeneration
[48].

In the CSF of MS patients, PGE2, PGI2, PGF2α, and PGD2
are increased [115]. In cuprizone-induced demyelination, oli-
godendrocyte apoptosis and a concomitant increase in the
gene expression of COX-2 and PGE2-EP2 precede histologi-
cal demyelination. COX-2 gene deletion, chronic treatment
with the COX-2 selective inhibitor celecoxib, or with the
EP2 antagonist reduces cuprizone-induced oligodendrocyte
apoptosis, the degree of demyelination, and motor dysfunc-
tion. Since COX-2 and EP2 are also expressed in oligoden-
drocytes, the pathway of COX-2-PGE2-EP2 protects oligo-
dendrocyte from apoptosis [54].

Celecoxib markedly inhibits production of PGE2 in the
spinal cords of ALS mice [59]. PGE2 stimulates glutamate
release from astrocytes. In ventral spinal cord, EP2 and EP3
are dominantly expressed in neurons and astrocytes. Although
EP2 and EP3 are coupled with opposite G proteins, Gs and Gi,
respectively, activation of the two receptors individually or in
combination also from chronic glutamate toxicity [116]. The
neuroprotection of EP2 is mimicked by application of
forskolin and blocked by inhibition of PKA. Those of EP3 is
blocked by pertussis toxin, suggesting that its protective effect
is dependent on Gi-coupled heterotrimeric signaling. Taken
together, these data demonstrate an unexpected neuroprotec-
tive effect mediated by PGE2, in which activation of its EP2
and EP3 protected motor neurons from chronic glutamate
toxicity.

PGE2 mainly functions as a promoter of epileptogenesis
[117]. EP2 antagonists reduced seizure severity and neuronal
injury following seizures [118]. mPGES-1 is induced in the
venous endothelia of the brain following an injection of
kainate [119]. The finding that the activity of mPGES-1 is
tightly coupled to that of COX-2 supports the importance of
PGE2 function under epileptic conditions [90]. EP1 modulates
native kainate receptors [120]. Global ablation of the EP1
gene has no effect on seizure threshold after kainate injection,
but reduces hippocampal neurodegeneration and a blunted
inflammatory response. EP1 activation potentiates
heteromeric but not homomeric kainate receptors via PKC
(Fig. 4). Plasma level of PGE2 is elevated in schizophrenia
[121], whereas CSF levels of PGE2 are increased in variant
CJD [122] and AIDS with dementia [81].

Plasma PGE2 is increased in patients with malignant brain
tumors (glioblastomas, anaplastic astrocytoma, malignant me-
ningioma, and medulloblastoma) and decreased after surgical
removal of both malignant and benign brain tumors. The an-
tineoplastic effect of COX-2 inhibitor is attenuated by PGE2,
suggesting the predominant mechanism is dependent on
PGE2. The EP1 antagonists inhibit the growth of glioma cell
lines in vitro and slow tumor growth in vivo, which is assessed
using glioma xenografts on SCID mice [123]. Thus, PGE2
facilitates LTP via presynaptic EP2. EP2 is involved in pro-
tective effects of PGE2 on neurological diseases such as
stroke, AD, MS, and ALS. PGE2 promotes epileptogenesis
and EP2 antagonists possess therapeutic potential for epilepsy.
Another Gs-coupled EP4 also exhibits neuroprotective effects
in the model of stroke and AD. On the other hand, PGE2
exacerbates neurodegeneration in stroke via EP1 and EP3.

Prostaglandin F2

PGF2 is synthesized via three pathways from PGE2, PGD2, or
PGH2 by PGE 9-ketoreductase, PGD 11-ketoreductase, or
PGH 9-,11-endoperoxide reductase, respectively (Fig. 1)
[124]. FP are coupled to Gq [125] and expressed in astrocytes
but not neurons [126]. PGF2α did not affect neuronal survival
directly in the neuron-rich culture [24]. However, astrocytic
PGF2α is increased in the in vivo model of ischemia [127] and
exhibits neurotoxicity [128]. After MCA occlusion/reperfu-
sion, the FP−/− mice had less neurological deficit and smaller
infarct volumes than those of the wild type (WT) mice. The
post-treatment of mice subjected to MCA occlusion with the
FP agonist increases neurological deficit and infarct size in
WT mice, but not in the latanoprost-treated FP−/− mice. It is
increased in patients with epilepsy, meningitis, or following
cerebrovascular accidents or neurosurgical removals of brain
tissue [129]. The intracisternal administration of PGF2α after
kainate treatment reduced the seizure score and mortality
[130]. PGF2α is increased in ischemia and epilepsy and

exhibits neurotoxic effects via FP, which is coupled to Gq
similarly to EP1.

Prostaglandin I2

PGI2 is produced from PGH2 by PGI synthase, a member of
the P450 superfamily [131]. PGI2 is a potent vasodilator and
has an antithrombotic effect. Plasma levels of PGI2 are signif-
icantly higher among stroke patients than control [132]. PGI2
is useful for ischemic neuronal damage because it improves
cerebral circulation [133]. The downstream of PGI2 receptors
is the signaling pathway of Gs, AC, cAMP, and PKA (Fig. 1).
In terms of ligand specificity, two distinct types of PGI2 re-
ceptors, IP1 and IP2, are expressed in the brain [134]. IP1 is
expressed in the peripheral nervous system such as the nucleus
of the solitary tract. On the other hand, IP2 is expressed in the
CNS, e.g., the hippocampus, cerebral cortex, thalamus, stria-
tum, and septum. The CNS-specific PGI2 receptor is
expressed mainly in neurons, but not in glial cells. IP receptor
ligands prevent the death of hippocampal neurons in vitro and
protect CA1 pyramidal neurons against ischemic damage
in vivo [135]. PGI2 is increased in ischemia and exhibits neu-
roprotective effects via IP2, which is coupled to Gs similarly
to EP2 and EP4.

Thromboxane A2

The TXA2 receptor (TP) is coupled with Gq and activates
PLC (Fig. 1) [136]. TP consists of two splicing variants,
TPα and TPβ. TPα mRNA is dominantly expressed in the
brain and vascular endothelial cells [137]. Although TP recep-
tor is expressed on neurons in the CNS [138], identified roles
of TXA2 in neurons have been limited to cell protection
against neurotoxicity [139]. TXA2 promotes neurite out-
growth in cortical neurons via MAPK activation [140].
TXA2 is induced in many CNS disorders including stroke
[141], epilepsy [142], and spinal cord injuries [143]. A vascu-
lar component is a major cellular source of TXA2 in CNS
pathology because CNS lesions are characterized by the pres-
ence of neovascularization and accumulation of abundant
numbers of platelets. However, brain tissue also expresses
TXA2, and activated glial cells can increase TXA2 release in
response to ischemic conditions [144]. An elevated level of
TXA2 has been found in the post-mortem brains of AD pa-
tients [145] and in the urine of patients with probable AD
[146]. TXA2 is suggested to be involved in the extrapyramidal
motor dysfunction of patients with AD [147]. Patients with
post-stroke dementia more often show increased throm-
boxane biosynthesis than non-demented stroke patients
[148]. In the brain, TXA2 receptors are expressed in both
neuronal cells and glial cells [138]. Neuronal cell death

Mol Neurobiol

has not yet been induced by TXA2 in vitro [102] and
in vivo [147] models. However, TP blockers improved
the Aβ-induced extrapyramidal motor dysfunction [147],
suggesting therapeutic potentials of TP blockers for AD
as well as stroke.

Prostaglandin D2

PGD synthase exists in both lipocalin-type (L-PGDS) and
hematopoietic (H-PGDS) forms [149]. As shown in Table 3,
L-PGDS mRNA is localized mainly in the leptomeninges,
choroid plexus, and oligodendrocytes [150]. On the other
hand, L-PGDS mRNA has also been reported to be abundant-
ly expressed in the thalamus, brainstem, cerebellum, spinal
cord, and telencephalic regions [151]. The lipocalin type is a
major constituent of the human CSF, representing 3 % of total
CSF protein [152]. H-PGDS mRNA is expressed in early
post-natal development in microglial cells and in the cerebel-
lum [153]. H-PGDS mRNA has also been reported to be
highly expressed in the cerebellum, modestly throughout the
gray and white matter, and moderately in the hippocampal
pyramidal neuronal layer.

PGD2 elicits its downstream effects by activating two G
protein-coupled receptors, the DP1 [154] and DP2,
chemoattractant receptor-homologous molecule expressed
on Th2 cells (CRTH2) receptor [155, 156]. DP1 and DP2
activate and inhibit AC via Gs and Gi, respectively (Fig. 1).
By northern blotting, mRNA of DP1 is detected in ileum, but
not in the brain [154]. Oida et al. reported that DP1 is detected
in the leptomeninges by in situ hybridization, but neither in the
brain parenchymal neurons nor glial cells [157] (Table 3). L-
PGDS and DP1 are detected by northern blotting in the
leptomeninges, whereas they are not by RT-PCR in the brain
parenchyma [158]. By northern blotting, mRNA of DP2 are
highly expressed in the peripheral tissues including small in-
testine, and lowly in the brain [159]. In contrast, Liang et al.
reported that DP1 and DP2 were detected by in situ hybridi-
zation in the hippocampus, cerebral cortex, and thalamus
[151]. PGD2 have been reported to mediate neuroprotection
via DP1 in cultured hippocampal neurons, organotypic slices
[151], and DP1 knockout (DP1−/−) mice [160]. However, it
should be noted that neither the protein expression of DP1 nor
pharmacological effects of DP1 blockers was described in the
two reports [151, 160]. An autoradiographical study with
[3H]PGD2 indicates that PGD2-binding proteins are restricted
to the gray matter [161]. High densities are present in the
cerebral cortex, preoptic area, amygdala, hypothalamic nuclei,
thalamic nuclei, hippocampus, pineal body, and cerebellar
cortex. However, there was little specific binding sites of
[3H]PGD2 in the plasma membrane of cerebral cortices
[102], confirming the report of Oida et al. [157].

Mol Neurobiol

Table 3

Expression of PGDS and DP in the brain

Tissues

Urade [150]

Oida [157]

Gerashcenko [158]

Mohri [153]

Liang [151]

CTX
HPC
THL
BS
CBL
SC
Neuron
Glia
MG
ODC
LM
CP
PC
WM
GM

H-PGDS

H-PGDS
H-PGDS

DP1, DP2
H-PGDS, L-PGDS, DP1, DP2
L-PGDS, DP1, DP2
L-PGDS, DP1
H-PGDS, L-PGDS, DP1, DP2
L-PGDS
H-PGDS DP2 (pyramidal)

n.d. DP1
n.d. DP1

H-PGDS

H-PGDS

DP1

L-PGDS DP1

H-PGDS

L-PGDS, DP1

L-PGDS
L-PGDS
L-PGDS

n.d. L-PGDS DP1

L-PGDS H-PGDS
L-PGDS

Yagami [102]

n.d. DP

PGDS and DP are expressed in various regions of brain
CTX cerebral cortex, HPC hippocampus, THL thalamus, BS brainstem, CBL cerebellum, SC spinal cord, BS brainstem, THL thalamus, LM
leptomeninges, CP choroid plexus, PC parenchyma, WM white matter, GM gray matter, MG microglia, d oligodendrocyte, n.d. not detected

PGD2 is produced in the brain by L-PGDS and circulated
in the CSF as a sleep hormone [162]. It stimulates DP1 recep-
tors on leptomeningeal cells of the basal forebrain to release
adenosine as a paracrine signaling molecule to promote sleep.
Adenosine activates adenosine A2a receptor-expressing sleep-
active neurons in the basal forebrain and the ventrolateral
preoptic area. Sleep-promoting neurons in the ventrolateral
preoptic area send inhibitory signals to suppress the histamin-
ergic neurons in the tuberomammillary nucleus, which con-
tribute to arousal through histamine H1 receptors.

PGD2 is increased significantly in the post-mortem cerebral
cortex of AD patients [145] and the animal model for stroke,
gerbil brain during reperfusion after bilateral common carotid
artery occlusion [163]. In the presence of glutamate, a DP2
agonist exhibits neurotoxicity in cultured hippocampal neu-
rons and organotypic slices [151]. PGD2 alone causes neuro-
nal cell death via apoptosis without glutamate in the cerebral
cortex [24, 25, 46, 102, 164]. PGD2 cleaves PARP, activates
caspase-3, and accumulates ubiquitinated proteins [164].
However, the neurotoxicity of PGD2 is not mediated by its
receptors as described below. First, blockers for DP1 and DP2
did not rescue neuron from the PGD2-induced activation of
caspase-3, the accumulation of ubiquitinated proteins, and ap-
optosis [102, 164]. Second, little mRNA of the PGD2 receptor
is observed in the rat [165, 166] and human [167] cerebral
cortex. Third, few binding sites of [3H]PGD2 were detected
in plasma membranes from cortices of rat and human [102,
168]. Fourth, the extent of specific [3H]PGD2 in total binding
is very low (30–40 %), although binding sites of PGD2 have
been reported in synaptosomes of rat [165] and human brains

[168]. Fifth, the ED50 value (8.2 μM) of PGD2 is much higher
than the affinity for PGD2 receptor (dissociation constant
(KD)=28 nM) [165]. Sixth, PGD2 required a latent time to
cause apoptosis.

The bifunctional aspects of COX-2 in epileptogenesis can
also be explained by the diversity of PGs. For instance, PGD2
can exhibit anticonvulsive functions. H-PGDS-knockout mice
or PGD2 receptor DP1-knockout mice shows more severe
seizures after pentylenetetrazol treatment than wild-type mice,
whereas deficiencies of L-PGDS or DP2 do not alter seizure
severity [64]. Examination of the effects of stimulation of DP1
in this model demonstrates a protective effect of DP1 (Fig. 2;
[169]). Post-natal lumbar spinal cord organotypic slices were
stimulated with the glutamate reuptake inhibitor D,L-threo-
hydroxyaspartate and the DP1 agonist BW245C. The DP1
activation in this model results in significant protection of
motor neurons. Thus, similar neuroprotective effects to those
in hippocampal slices were obtained in this chronic model of
glutamate toxicity by the EP2, EP3, and DP1. The neuropro-
tective effects of PGD2 and PGE2 receptors on neuronal sur-
vival therefore present an interesting paradox, in which the
inhibition of COX-2 activity and decreased prostaglandin pro-
duction are protective; however, the activation of selected
PGE2 or PGD2 receptors is also protective. This neuroprotec-
tion occurs at physiologic concentrations in the low to high
nanomolar range, close to the known binding affinities of
these receptors. PGE2 and PGD2 individually do not mediate
the toxic effects of COX-2 via their receptors in these models
of excitotoxic neuronal injury, suggesting neurotoxic mecha-
nisms independent of EP and DP.

Cyclopentenone Prostaglandins

Eicosanoids are divided into two groups according to their
prostaglandin mechanism of action: the conventional PGs,
e.g., PGD2 and PGE2, and the cyclopentenone-type PGs,
e.g., PGA2 and 15-deoxy-△12,14-PGJ2 (15d-PGJ2). 15d-PGJ2
exhibits neuroprotective effects at lower concentrations and
neurotoxic effects at higher concentrations [170]. There are
two receptors for 15d-PGJ2, a membrane receptor,
chemoattractant receptor homologous molecule expressed on
Th2 cells (CRTH2) [171] and a nuclear receptor, peroxysome
proliferators-activated receptor γ (PPARγ) [172, 173].
PPAR-γ agonists reduces lipopolysaccharide and interferon
γ-induced neuronal cell death in the cerebellum [174], indi-
cating the involvement of PPAR-γ in neuroprotection.
Activation of PPAR-γ protects the brain from cerebral ische-
mia [175] and Aβ-dependent neurodegeneration [176]

In spite of the absence of DPs, PGD2 induces neuronal
apoptosis with a time lag [102, 164]. During the time lag,
PGD2 is non-enzymatically dehydrated to produce PGJ2,
△12-PGJ2, and 15d-PGJ2 [102, 177]. Among PGD2 metabo-
lites, 15d-PGJ2 causes neuronal cell death most potently with-
out the time lag [102]. Since 15d-PGJ2 cleaves PARP, acti-
vates caspase-3, and accumulates ubiquitinated proteins and
induces neuronal apoptosis as well as PGD2, the neurotoxicity
of PGD2 is mediated through its bioactive cyclopentenone
metabolites [102, 164, 178]. However, blockers for PPAR-γ
[102] and DP2 (unpublished data) did not rescue neuron from
the 15d-PGJ2-induced apoptosis. Thus, 15d-PGJ2 causes neu-
ronal cell death independently of the two receptors.

15d-PGJ2 inhibits proteasome activity [179] and
deubiquitination [180]. By covalently binding to cysteine thiol
groups in proteins through Michael addition, 15d-PGJ2 also
provoke changes in protein tertiary structure [181] that could
impede protein degradation and lead to protein accumulation.
All of these effects on the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway and
its substrates induced by 15d-PGJ2 will have a devastating
impact on proteasome activity bringing about the build-up of
pro-apoptotic and detrimental proteins, such as p53 and Ub
proteins [182]. Thus, 15d-PGJ2 mediates the neurotoxicity of
PGD2 and induces neuronal apoptosis via the suppression of
proteasome activity.

Conclusion

In contrast to peripheral tissues, COX-2 is constitutively
expressed in the CNS and plays important physiological roles
in memory and learning. COX-2 is upregulated in hippocam-
pal and cortical glutamatergic neurons, where it has a pivotal
role in synaptic activity, long-term synaptic plasticity, and in
the neurovascular coupling during functional hyperemia.
Inhibition of COX-2 reduces post-synaptic membrane

Mol Neurobiol

excitability, back-propagating dendritic action potential-
associated Ca2+ influx, and LTP induction in the hippocam-
pus. PGE2 released from post-synapse acts pre-synaptic EP2
retrogradely, suggesting that PKA modulates pre-synaptic
Ca2+ concentration via phosphorylation of N- and P/Q-
calcium channels.

COX-2 plays important pathological roles in neurological
diseases such as stroke, AD, PD, MS, ALS, epilepsy, schizo-
phrenia, BD, CJD, and neoplasm. Neuronal COX-2 is up-
regulated in the brain of stroke, AD, PD, BD, and CJD pa-
tients, whereas micoglial one is in PD, MS, and ALS.
Oligodendrocytic COX-2 is induced in MS, whereas astrocyt-
ic one is in epilepsy. On the other hand, microglial COX-1 is
up-regulated in the brain of AD and CJD patients. Both COX-
1 and COX-2 are induced in primary tumors and correlated
with their pathological grade. PGE2 is elevated in the plasma
of patients with brain tumors. PGE2 attenuates the anticancer
effect of COX-2 inhibitor, and EP1 antagonists inhibit the
growth of glioma, suggesting the pathway of COX-2-PGE2
is involved in the tumorigenesis in the brain.

COX-2 inhibitors exhibit neuroprotective effects in vivo
and in vitro models of stroke, AD, PD, MS, ALS, and epilep-
sy. COX-2 inhibitors show beneficial effects in schizophrenia,
suggesting neurodegenerative effects of COX-2 products.
Neurotoxic COX-2 products share the common pathway via
Gq-coupled receptors. mPGES1 is up-regulated in stroke, AD,
PD, MS, ALS, epilepsy, and schizophrenia. Parenchymal
PGE2 is elevated in stroke, AD, and PD, whereas CSF PGE2
is in MS, ALS, CJD, and AIDS. PGE2 disrupts Ca2+ homeo-
stasis by impairing Na+-Ca2+ exchange via EP1, resulting in
the excess Ca2+ accumulation and neurodegeneration.
Alternatively, PGE2 is non-enzymatically dehydrated to a
cyclopentenone PGA2, which induces neuronal cell death. It
should be noted that the sole neurotoxicity of PGE2, PGF2α, or
TXA2 has not yet been reported, although the three PGs can
exacerbate neurological diseases. In contrast to Gq-coupled
receptors, Gs-coupled receptors such as DP1, EP2/EP4, and
IP are involved in neuroprotection via PKA activation.
However, further studies are required to clear how Gi-
coupled EP3 mediates neuroprotection.

Although PGD2 induces neuronal apoptosis, neither DP1
nor DP2 is involved in the neurotoxicity. As well as PGE2,
PGD2 is non-enzymatically dehydrated to a cyclopentenone
15d-PGJ2, which induces neuronal cell death. However, neu-
rotoxicities of these cyclopentenones are independent of their
receptors. There is a discrepancy in the hippocampal expres-
sion of DP1. As shown in Table 3, mRNA of DP1 is predom-
inantly expressed in the leptomeninges [157, 158]. Liang et al.
reported that mRNA of DP1 was detected in the cerebral cor-
tex,
thalamus, brainstem, and cerebellum besides
leptomeninges [151]. In the primary culture of rat hippocam-
pal neurons, DP1 has been reported to mediate the neuropro-
tection of PGD2 [151]. In contrast, mRNA of DP1 has not

Mol Neurobiol

been detected in parenchymal neurons [157, 158]. No specific
binding site of [3H]PGD2 is detected in neuronal plasma mem-
branes of the cerebral cortex [102], supporting the idea that
DP1 is not expressed in parenchymal neurons including hip-
pocampal pyramidal neurons. To prove the neuroprotective
effect of PGD2 via DP1, it is required to detect the protein of
DP1 and blocking effects of DP1 antagonists in hippocampal
neurons.

Arrestin has been known as agonist-mediated desensitiza-
tion. Arrestin-dependent signaling pathway has been sug-
gested to be involved in PGs-elicited suppression of pro-
inflammatory factors production in brain microglia [183].
Recent studies are shedding light on the G protein-
independent signalings as novel COX-PG pathways.

Conflict of Interest The authors have declared that no competing in-
terests exist.

References

1. Feng L, Sun W, Xia Y, Tang WW, Chanmugam P, Soyoola E,
Wilson CB, Hwang D (1993) Cloning two isoforms of rat cyclo-
oxygenase: differential regulation of their expression. Arch
Biochem Biophys 307(2):361–368

2. Chandrasekharan NV, Dai H, Roos KL, Evanson NK, Tomsik J,
Elton TS, Simmons DL (2002) COX-3, a cyclooxygenase-1 var-
iant inhibited by acetaminophen and other analgesic/antipyretic
drugs: cloning, structure, and expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 99(21):13926–13931. doi:10.1073/pnas.162468699

3. Deininger MH, Schluesener HJ (1999) Cyclooxygenases-1 and -2
are differentially localized to microglia and endothelium in rat
EAE and glioma. J Neuroimmunol 95(1–2):202–208

4. Yamagata K, Andreasson KI, Kaufmann WE, Barnes CA, Worley
PF (1993) Expression of a mitogen-inducible cyclooxygenase in
brain neurons: regulation by synaptic activity and glucocorticoids.
Neuron 11(2):371–386

5. Kaufmann WE, Worley PF, Pegg J, Bremer M, Isakson P (1996)
COX-2, a synaptically induced enzyme, is expressed by excitatory
neurons at postsynaptic sites in rat cerebral cortex. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 93(6):2317–2321

6. Yagami T (2006) Cerebral arachidonate cascade in dementia:
Al zhe im er ’s di s ea se a nd v a sc u la r d e m e nt i a. C ur r
Neuropharmacol 4(1):87–100

7. Niwa K, Araki E, Morham SG, Ross ME, Iadecola C (2000)
Cyclooxygenase-2 contributes to functional hyperemia in
whisker-barrel cortex. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci 20(2):763–
770

8. Yagami T, Yamamoto Y, Koma H (2014) The role of secretory
phospholipase A(2) in the central nervous system and neurologi-
cal diseases. Mol Neurobiol 49(2):863–876. doi:10.1007/s12035-
013-8565-9

9. Malinow R, Schulman H, Tsien RW (1989) Inhibition of postsyn-
aptic PKC or CaMKII blocks induction but not expression of LTP.
Science 245(4920):862–866

10. English JD, Sweatt JD (1997) A requirement for the mitogen-
activated protein kinase cascade in hippocampal long term poten-
tiation. J Biol Chem 272(31):19103–19106

11. Chen C, Magee JC, Bazan NG (2002) Cyclooxygenase-2 regu-
lates prostaglandin E2 signaling in hippocampal long-term synap-
tic plasticity. J Neurophysiol 87(6):2851–2857

12. Berrouschot J, Sterker M, Bettin S, Koster J, Schneider D (1998)
Mortality of space-occupying (‘malignant’) middle cerebral artery
infarction under conservative intensive care. Intensive Care Med
24 (6):620–623

13. Sacco S, Marini C, Toni D, Olivieri L, Carolei A (2009) Incidence
and 10-year survival of intracerebral hemorrhage in a population-
based registry. Stroke; a journal of cerebral circulation 40(2):394–
399. doi:10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.523209

14. Shmelzer Z, Haddad N, Admon E, Pessach I, Leto TL, Eitan-
Hazan Z, Hershfinkel M, Levy R (2003) Unique targeting of cy-
tosolic phospholipase A2 to plasma membranes mediated by the
NADPH oxidase in phagocytes. J Cell Biol 162(4):683–692. doi:
10.1083/jcb.200211056

15. Shmelzer Z, Karter M, Eisenstein M, Leto TL, Hadad N, Ben-
Menahem D, Gitler D, Banani S et al (2008) Cytosolic phospho-
lipase A2alpha is targeted to the p47phox-PX domain of the as-
sembled NADPH oxidase via a novel binding site in its C2 do-
main. J Biol Chem 283(46):31898–31908. doi:10.1074/jbc.
M804674200

16. Kriem B, Sponne I, Fifre A, Malaplate-Armand C, Lozac’h-Pillot
K, Koziel V, Yen-Potin FT, Bihain B et al (2005) Cytosolic phos-
pholipase A2 mediates neuronal apoptosis induced by soluble
oligomers of the amyloid-beta peptide. FASEB J 19(1):85–87.
doi:10.1096/fj.04-1807fje

17. Malaplate-Armand C, Florent-Bechard S, Youssef I, Koziel V,
Sponne I, Kriem B, Leininger-Muller B, Olivier JL et al (2006)
Soluble oligomers of amyloid-beta peptide induce neuronal apo-
ptosis by activating a cPLA2-dependent sphingomyelinase-cer-
amide pathway. Neurobiol Dis 23(1):178–189. doi:10.1016/j.
nbd.2006.02.010

18. He X, Huang Y, Li B, Gong CX, Schuchman EH (2010)
Deregulation of sphingolipid metabolism in Alzheimer’s disease.
Neurobiol Aging 31(3):398–408. doi:10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.
2008.05.010

19. Casals JB, Pieri NC, Feitosa ML, Ercolin AC, Roballo KC,
Barreto RS, Bressan FF, Martins DS et al (2011) The use of animal
models for stroke research: a review. Comp Med 61(4):305–313
20. Rossmeisl JH, Jr., Rohleder JJ, Pickett JP, Duncan R, Herring IP
(2007) Presumed and confirmed striatocapsular brain infarctions
in six dogs. Vet Ophthalmol 10(1):23–36. doi:10.1111/j.1463-
5224.2007.00487.x

21. Umemura K, Nakashima M (1993) A new model of middle cere-
bral artery thrombosis in rats. Yakubutsu Seishin Kodo=Jpn J
Psychiatr Treat 13(1):9–17

22. Sairanen T, Ristimaki A, Karjalainen-Lindsberg ML, Paetau A,
Kaste M, Lindsberg PJ (1998) Cyclooxygenase-2 is induced glob-
ally in infarcted human brain. Ann Neurol 43(6):738–747. doi:10.
1002/ana.410430608

23. Nogawa S, Zhang F, Ross ME, Iadecola C (1997) Cyclo-
oxygenase-2 gene expression in neurons contributes to ischemic
brain damage. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci 17(8):2746–2755

24. Yagami T, Ueda K, Asakura K, Hata S, Kuroda T, Sakaeda T,
Takasu N, Tanaka K et al (2002) Human group IIA secretory
phospholipase A2 induces neuronal cell death via apoptosis.
Mol Pharmacol 61(1):114–126

25. Yagami T, Ueda K, Asakura K, Hayasaki-Kajiwara Y, Nakazato
H, Sakaeda T, Hata S, Kuroda T et al (2002) Group IB secretory
phospholipase A2 induces neuronal cell death via apoptosis. J
Neurochem 81(3):449–461

26. Yagami T, Ueda K, Asakura K, Hata S, Kuroda T, Sakaeda T,
Kishino J, Sakaguchi G et al (2002) Group IB secretory phospho-
lipase A(2)induces cell death in the cultured cortical neurons: a

possible involvement of its binding sites. Brain Res 949(1–2):
197–201

27. Lin TN, Wang Q, Simonyi A, Chen JJ, Cheung WM, He YY, Xu
J, Sun AY et al (2004) Induction of secretory phospholipase A2 in
reactive astrocytes in response to transient focal cerebral ischemia
in the rat brain. J Neurochem 90(3):637–645

28. Yagami T, Ueda K, Asakura K, Sakaeda T, Hata S, Kuroda T,
Sakaguchi G, Itoh N et al (2003) Porcine pancreatic group IB
secretory phospholipase A2 potentiates Ca2+ influx through L-
type voltage-sensitive Ca2+ channels. Brain Res 960(1–2):71–80
29. Yagami T, Ueda K, Asakura K, Nakazato H, Hata S, Kuroda T,
Sakaeda T, Sakaguchi G et al (2003) Human group IIA secretory
phospholipase A2 potentiates Ca2+ influx through L-type volt-
age-sensitive Ca2+ channels in cultured rat cortical neurons. J
Neurochem 85(3):749–758

31.

30. Niwa K, Haensel C, Ross ME, Iadecola C (2001)
Cyclooxygenase-1 participates in selected vasodilator responses
of the cerebral circulation. Circ Res 88(6):600–608
Iadecola C, Sugimoto K, Niwa K, Kazama K, Ross ME (2001)
Increased susceptibility to ischemic brain injury in
cyclooxygenase-1-deficient mice. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab
Off J Int Soc Cereb Blood Flow Metab 21(12):1436–1441. doi:
10.1097/00004647-200112000-00008

32. Li W, Wu S, Hickey RW, Rose ME, Chen J, Graham SH (2008)
Neuronal cyclooxygenase-2 activity and prostaglandins PGE2,
PGD2, and PGF2 alpha exacerbate hypoxic neuronal injury in
neuron-enriched primary culture. Neurochem Res 33(3):490–499
33. Tomimoto H, Shibata M, Ihara M, Akiguchi I, Ohtani R, Budka H
(2002) A comparative study on the expression of cyclooxygenase
and 5-lipoxygenase during cerebral ischemia in humans. Acta
Neuropathol 104(6):601–607. doi:10.1007/s00401-002-0590-0

34. Yagami T, Ueda K, Hata S, Kuroda T, Itoh N, Sakaguchi G,
Okamura N, Sakaeda T et al (2005) S-2474, a novel nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory drug, rescues cortical neurons from human
group IIA secretory phospholipase A(2)-induced apoptosis.
Neuropharmacology 49(2):174–184. doi:10.1016/j.neuropharm.
2005.02.011

35. Selkoe DJ (1991) The molecular pathology of Alzheimer’s dis-

ease. Neuron 6(4):487–498

36. Ueda K, Shinohara S, Yagami T, Asakura K, Kawasaki K (1997)
Amyloid beta protein potentiates Ca2+ influx through L-type volt-
age-sensitive Ca2+ channels: a possible involvement of free rad-
icals. J Neurochem 68(1):265–271

37. Ueda K, Yagami T, Kageyama H, Kawasaki K (1996) Protein
kinase inhibitor attenuates apoptotic cell death induced by amy-
loid beta protein in culture of the rat cerebral cortex. Neurosci Lett
203(3):175–178

38. Yermakova AV, Rollins J, Callahan LM, Rogers J, O’Banion MK
(1999) Cyclooxygenase-1 in human Alzheimer and control brain:
quantitative analysis of expression by microglia and CA3 hippo-
campal neurons. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 58(11):1135–1146

39. Pasinetti GM, Aisen PS (1998) Cyclooxygenase-2 expression is
increased in frontal cortex of Alzheimer’s disease brain.
Neuroscience 87(2):319–324

40. Hwang DY, Chae KR, Kang TS, Hwang JH, Lim CH, Kang HK,
Goo JS, Lee MR et al (2002) Alterations in behavior, amyloid
beta-42, caspase-3, and Cox-2 in mutant PS2 transgenic mouse
model of Alzheimer’s disease. FASEB J 16(8):805–813. doi:10.
1096/fj.01-0732com

41. Cui JG, Kuroda H, Chandrasekharan NV, Pelaez RP, Simmons
DL, Bazan NG, Lukiw WJ (2004) Cyclooxygenase-3 gene ex-
pression in Alzheimer hippocampus and in stressed human neural
cells. Neurochem Res 29(9):1731–1737

42. Launer L (2003) Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug use and the
risk for Alzheimer’s disease: dissecting the epidemiological evi-
dence. Drugs 63(8):731–739

Mol Neurobiol

43. Rogers J, Kirby LC, Hempelman SR, Berry DL, McGeer PL,
Kaszniak AW, Zalinski J, Cofield M et al (1993) Clinical trial of
indomethacin in Alzheimer’s disease. Neurology 43(8):1609–
1611

44. Sung S, Yang H, Uryu K, Lee EB, Zhao L, Shineman D,
Trojanowski JQ, Lee VM et al (2004) Modulation of nuclear
factor-kappa B activity by indomethacin influences A beta levels
but not A beta precursor protein metabolism in a model of
Alzheimer’s disease. Am J Pathol 165(6):2197–2206

45. Szekely CA, Green RC, Breitner JC, Ostbye T, Beiser AS,
Corrada MM, Dodge HH, Ganguli M et al (2008) No advantage
of A beta 42-lowering NSAIDs for prevention of Alzheimer de-
mentia in six pooled cohort studies. Neurology 70(24):2291–
2298. doi:10.1212/01.wnl.0000313933.17796.f6

46. Yagami T, Ueda K, Asakura K, Sakaeda T, Kuroda T, Hata S,
Kambayashi Y, Fujimoto M (2001) Effects of S-2474, a novel
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug, on amyloid beta protein-
induced neuronal cell death. Br J Pharmacol 134(3):673–681.
doi:10.1038/sj.bjp.0704261

47. Teismann P (2012) COX-2 in the neurodegenerative process of
Parkinson’s disease. Biofactors 38(6):395–397. doi:10.1002/biof.
1035

48. Teismann P, Tieu K, Choi DK, Wu DC, Naini A, Hunot S, Vila M,
Jackson-Lewis Vet al (2003) Cyclooxygenase-2 is instrumental in
Parkinson’s disease neurodegeneration. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
100(9):5473–5478. doi:10.1073/pnas.0837397100

49. Teismann P, Ferger B (2001) Inhibition of the cyclooxygenase
isoenzymes COX-1 and COX-2 provide neuroprotection in the
MPTP-mouse model of Parkinson’s disease. Synapse 39(2):167–
174. doi:10.1002/1098-2396(200102)39:2<167::AID-SYN8>3.0.
CO;2-U

50. Feng ZH, Wang TG, Li DD, Fung P, Wilson BC, Liu B, Ali SF,
Langenbach R et al (2002) Cyclooxygenase-2-deficient mice are
resistant to 1-methyl-4-phenyl1, 2, 3, 6-tetrahydropyridine-
induced damage of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra.
Neurosci Lett 329(3):354–358

51. Prat A, Antel J (2005) Pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis. Curr

Opin Neurol 18(3):225–230

52. Rose JW, Hill KE, Watt HE, Carlson NG (2004) Inflammatory cell
expression of cyclooxygenase-2 in the multiple sclerosis lesion. J
Neuroimmunol 149(1–2):40–49. doi:10.1016/j.jneuroim.2003.12.
021

53. Carlson NG, Hill KE, Tsunoda I, Fujinami RS, Rose JW (2006)
The pathologic role for COX-2 in apoptotic oligodendrocytes in
virus induced demyelinating disease: implications for multiple
sclerosis. J Neuroimmunol 174(1–2):21–31. doi:10.1016/j.
jneuroim.2006.01.008

54. Palumbo S, Toscano CD, Parente L, Weigert R, Bosetti F (2012)
The cyclooxygenase-2 pathway via the PGE(2) EP2 receptor con-
tributes to oligodendrocytes apoptosis in cuprizone-induced de-
myelination. J Neurochem 121(3):418–427. doi:10.1111/j.1471-
4159.2011.07363.x

55. Liang X, Wu L, Wang Q, Hand T, Bilak M, McCullough L,
Andreasson K (2007) Function of COX-2 and prostaglandins in
neurological disease. J Mol Neurosci 33(1):94–99

56. Yiangou Y, Facer P, Durrenberger P, Chessell IP, Naylor A,
Bountra C, Banati RR, Anand P (2006) COX-2, CB2 and
P2X7-immunoreactivities are increased in activated microglial
cells/macrophages of multiple sclerosis and amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis spinal cord. BMC Neurol 6:12. doi:10.1186/1471-
2377-6-12

57. Yasojima K, Tourtellotte WW, McGeer EG, McGeer PL (2001)
Marked increase in cyclooxygenase-2 in ALS spinal cord: impli-
cations for therapy. Neurology 57(6):952–956

58. Almer G, Guegan C, Teismann P, Naini A, Rosoklija G, Hays AP,
Chen C, Przedborski S (2001) Increased expression of the pro-

Mol Neurobiol

inflammatory enzyme cyclooxygenase-2 in amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis. Ann Neurol 49(2):176–185

59. Drachman DB, Frank K, Dykes-Hoberg M, Teismann P, Almer G,
Przedborski S, Rothstein JD (2002) Cyclooxygenase 2 inhibition
protects motor neurons and prolongs survival in a transgenic
mouse model of ALS. Ann Neurol 52(6):771–778. doi:10.1002/
ana.10374

60. Sharma AK, Reams RY, Jordan WH, Miller MA, Thacker HL,
Snyder PW (2007) Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy: pathogenesis,
induced rodent models and lesions. Toxicol Pathol 35(7):984–
999. doi:10.1080/01926230701748305

61. Wetherington J, Serrano G, Dingledine R (2008) Astrocytes in the
epileptic brain. Neuron 58(2):168–178. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.
2008.04.002

62. Desjardins P, Sauvageau A, Bouthillier A, Navarro D, Hazell AS,
Rose C, Butterworth RF (2003) Induction of astrocytic
cyclooxygenase-2 in epileptic patients with hippocampal sclero-
sis. Neurochem Int 42(4):299–303

63. Kunz T, Oliw EH (2001) Nimesulide aggravates kainic acid-

induced seizures in the rat. Pharmacol Toxicol 88(5):271–276

64. Silakova JM, Hewett JA, Hewett SJ (2004) Naproxen reduces
excitotoxic neurodegeneration in vivo with an extended therapeu-
tic window. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 309(3):1060–1066. doi:10.
1124/jpet.103.063867

65. Holtman L, van Vliet EA, van Schaik R, Queiroz CM, Aronica E,
Gorter JA (2009) Effects of SC58236, a selective COX-2 inhibi-
tor, on epileptogenesis and spontaneous seizures in a rat model for
temporal lobe epilepsy. Epilepsy Res 84(1):56–66. doi:10.1016/j.
eplepsyres.2008.12.006

66. Gobbo OL, O’Mara SM (2004) Post-treatment, but not pre-treat-
ment, with the selective cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor celecoxib
markedly enhances functional recovery from kainic acid-induced
neurodegeneration. Neuroscience 125(2):317–327. doi:10.1016/j.
neuroscience.2004.01.045

67. Takemiya T, Suzuki K, Sugiura H, Yasuda S, Yamagata K,
Kawakami Y, Maru E (2003) Inducible brain COX-2 facilitates
the recurrence of hippocampal seizures in mouse rapid kindling.
Prostaglandins Other Lipid Mediat 71(3–4):205–216

68. Manabe Y, Anrather J, Kawano T, Niwa K, Zhou P, Ross ME,
Iadecola C (2004) Prostanoids, not reactive oxygen species, me-
diate COX-2-dependent neurotoxicity. Ann Neurol 55(5):668–
675. doi:10.1002/ana.20078

69. Schultz SK, Andreasen NC (1999) Schizophrenia. Lancet

353(9162):1425–1430

70. Wei J, Hemmings GP (2004) A study of a genetic association
between the PTGS2/PLA2G4A locus and schizophrenia.
Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fat Acids 70(4):413–415. doi:10.
1016/j.plefa.2003.12.018

71. Rao JS, Kim HW, Harry GJ, Rapoport SI, Reese EA (2013)
Increased neuroinflammatory and arachidonic acid cascade
markers, and reduced synaptic proteins, in the postmortem frontal
cortex from schizophrenia patients. Schizophr Res 147(1):24–31.
doi:10.1016/j.schres.2013.02.017

72. Muller N, Myint AM, Krause D, Weidinger E, Schwarz MJ (2013)
Anti-inflammatory treatment in schizophrenia. Prog Neuro-
Psychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 42:146–153. doi:10.1016/j.
pnpbp.2012.11.008

73. Sommer IE, de Witte L, Begemann M, Kahn RS (2012)
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in schizophrenia: ready
for practice or a good start? A meta-analysis. J Clin Psychiatry
73(4):414–419. doi:10.4088/JCP.10r06823

74. Nitta M, Kishimoto T, Muller N, Weiser M, Davidson M, Kane
JM, Correll CU (2013) Adjunctive use of nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs for schizophrenia: a meta-analytic investiga-
tion of randomized controlled trials. Schizophr Bull 39(6):1230–
1241. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbt070

75. Kim HW, Rapoport SI, Rao JS (2011) Altered arachidonic acid
cascade enzymes in postmortem brain from bipolar disorder
patients. Mol Psychiatry 16(4):419–428

76. Ketterer MW, Brymer J, Rhoads K, Kraft P, Lovallo WR (1996) Is
aspirin, as used for antithrombosis, an emotion-modulating agent?
J Psychosom Res 40(1):53–58

77. Nery FG, Monkul ES, Hatch JP, Fonseca M, Zunta-Soares GB,
Frey BN, Bowden CL, Soares JC (2008) Celecoxib as an adjunct
in the treatment of depressive or mixed episodes of bipolar disor-
der: a double-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled study. Hum
Psychopharmacol 23(2):87–94. doi:10.1002/hup.912

78. Rapoport SI (2014) Lithium and the other mood stabilizers effec-
tive in bipolar disorder target the rat brain arachidonic acid cas-
cade. ACS Chem Neurosci 5(6):459–467. doi:10.1021/
cn500058v

79. Deininger MH, Bekure-Nemariam K, Trautmann K, Morgalla M,
Meyermann R, Schluesener HJ (2003) Cyclooxygenase-1 and −2
in brains of patients who died with sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease. J Mol Neurosci 20(1):25–30. doi:10.1385/JMN:20:1:25
80. Minghetti L, Pocchiari M (2007) Cyclooxygenase-2, prostaglan-
din E2, and microglial activation in prion diseases. Int Rev
Neurobiol 82:265–275. doi:10.1016/S0074-7742(07)82014-9

81. Griffin DE, Wesselingh SL, McArthur JC (1994) Elevated central
nervous system prostaglandins in human immunodeficiency
virus-associated dementia. Ann Neurol 35(5):592–597. doi:10.
1002/ana.410350513

82. Wrensch M, Minn Y, Chew T, Bondy M, Berger MS (2002)
Epidemiology of primary brain tumors: current concepts and re-
view of the literature. Neuro-Oncology 4(4):278–299

83. Deininger MH, Meyermann R, Trautmann K, Morgalla M,
Duffner F, Grote EH, Wickboldt J, Schluesener HJ (2000)
Cyclooxygenase (COX)-1 expressing macrophages/microglial
cells and COX-2 expressing astrocytes accumulate during
oligodendroglioma progression. Brain Res 885(1):111–116
Joki T, Heese O, Nikas DC, Bello L, Zhang J, Kraeft SK, Seyfried
NT, Abe T et al (2000) Expression of cyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2)
in human glioma and in vitro inhibition by a specific COX-2
inhibitor, NS-398. Cancer Res 60(17):4926–4931

84.

85. Kang HC, Kim IH, Park CI, Park SH (2014) Immunohistochemical
analysis of cyclooxygenase-2 and brain fatty acid binding protein
expression in grades I-II meningiomas: correlation with tumor grade
and clinical outcome after radiotherapy. Neuropathol Off J Jpn Soc
Neuropathol 34(5):446–454. doi:10.1111/neup.12128

86. Mitchell JA, Warner TD (1999) Cyclo-oxygenase-2: pharmacolo-
gy, physiology, biochemistry and relevance to NSAID therapy. Br
J Pharmacol 128(6):1121–1132. doi:10.1038/sj.bjp.0702897

87. Murakami M, Kambe T, Shimbara S, Kudo I (1999) Functional
coup ling between v arious p hos pho lipas e A2 s and
cyclooxygenases in immediate and delayed prostanoid biosynthet-
ic pathways. J Biol Chem 274(5):3103–3115

88. Ohno K, Fujiwara M, Fukushima M, Narumiya S (1986)
Metabolic dehydration of prostaglandin E2 and cellular uptake
of the dehydration product: correlation with prostaglandin E2-
induced growth inhibition. Biochem Biophys Res Commun
139(2):808–815

89. Tanioka T, Nakatani Y, Semmyo N, Murakami M, Kudo I (2000)
Molecular identification of cytosolic prostaglandin E2 synthase
that is functionally coupled with cyclooxygenase-1 in immediate
prostaglandin E2 biosynthesis. J Biol Chem 275(42):32775–
32782. doi:10.1074/jbc.M003504200

90. Murakami M, Naraba H, Tanioka T, Semmyo N, Nakatani Y,
Kojima F, Ikeda T, Fueki M et al (2000) Regulation of prostaglan-
din E2 biosynthesis by inducible membrane-associated prosta-
glandin E2 synthase that acts in concert with cyclooxygenase-2.
J Biol Chem 275(42):32783–32792. doi:10.1074/jbc.
M003505200

91. Murakami M, Nakashima K, Kamei D, Masuda S, Ishikawa Y,
Ishii T, Ohmiya Y, Watanabe K et al (2003) Cellular prostaglandin
E2 production by membrane-bound prostaglandin E synthase-2
via both cyclooxygenases-1 and -2. J Biol Chem 278(39):
37937–37947. doi:10.1074/jbc.M305108200

92. Vazquez-Tello A, Fan L, Hou X, Joyal JS, Mancini JA, Quiniou C,
Clyman RI, Gobeil F Jr et al (2004) Intracellular-specific
colocalization of prostaglandin E2 synthases and cyclooxygenases
in the brain. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol 287(5):
R1155–R1163. doi:10.1152/ajpregu.00077.2004

93. Sang N, Zhang J, Marcheselli V, Bazan NG, Chen C (2005)
Postsynaptically synthesized prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) modulates
hippocampal synaptic transmission via a presynaptic PGE2 EP2
receptor. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci 25(43):9858–9870. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2392-05.2005
Ikeda-Matsuo Y, Hirayama Y, Ota A, Uematsu S, Akira S, Sasaki
Y (2010) Microsomal prostaglandin E synthase-1 and
cyclooxygenase-2 are both required for ischaemic excitotoxicity.
Br J Pharmacol 159(5):1174–1186. doi:10.1111/j.1476-5381.
2009.00595.x

94.

95. Chaudhry UA, Zhuang H, Crain BJ, Dore S (2008) Elevated mi-
crosomal prostaglandin-E synthase-1 in Alzheimer’s disease.
Alzheimers Dement J Alzheimers Assoc 4(1):6–13. doi:10.1016/
j.jalz.2007.10.015

96. Zhu P, Genc A, Zhang X, Zhang J, Bazan NG, Chen C (2005)
Heterogeneous expression and regulation of hippocampal prosta-
glandin E2 receptors. J Neurosci Res 81(6):817–826. doi:10.1002/
jnr.20597

97. Akaneya Y, Tsumoto T (2006) Bidirectional trafficking of prosta-
glandin E2 receptors involved in long-term potentiation in visual
cortex. J Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci 26(40):10209–10221. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3028-06.2006

98. Yokota C, Kaji T, Kuge Y, Inoue H, Tamaki N, Minematsu K
(2004) Temporal and topographic profiles of cyclooxygenase-2
expression during 24 h of focal brain ishemia in rats. Neurosci
Lett 357(3):219–222. doi:10.1016/j.neulet.2003.12.109

99. Kawano T, Anrather J, Zhou P, Park L, Wang G, Frys KA, Kunz
A, Cho S et al (2006) Prostaglandin E2 EP1 receptors: down-
stream effectors of COX-2 neurotoxicity. Nat Med 12(2):225–
229. doi:10.1038/nm1362

100. Akaike A, Kaneko S, Tamura Y, Nakata N, Shiomi H, Ushikubi F,
Narumiya S (1994) Prostaglandin E2 protects cultured cortical
neurons against N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-mediated gluta-
mate cytotoxicity. Brain Res 663(2):237–243

101. Hell JW, Yokoyama CT, Wong ST, Warner C, Snutch TP, Catterall
WA (1993) Differential phosphorylation of two size forms of the
neuronal class C L-type calcium channel alpha 1 subunit. J Biol
Chem 268(26):19451–19457

102. Yagami T, Ueda K, Asakura K, Takasu N, Sakaeda T, Itoh N,
Sakaguchi G, Kishino J, Nakazato H, Katsuyama Y, Nagasaki T,
Okamura N, Hori Y, Hanasaki K, Arimura A, Fujimoto M (2003)
Novel binding sites of 15-deoxy-Delta12,14-prostaglandin J2 in
plasma membranes from primary rat cortical neurons. Exp Cell
Res 291(1):212–227

103. McCullough L, Wu L, Haughey N, Liang X, Hand T, Wang Q,
Breyer RM, Andreasson K (2004) Neuroprotective function of the
PGE2 EP2 receptor in cerebral ischemia. J Neurosci Off J Soc
Neurosci 24(1):257–268. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4485-03.
2004

104. Liang X, Lin L, Woodling NS, Wang Q, Anacker C, Pan T,
Merchant M, Andreasson K (2011) Signaling via the prostaglan-
din E(2) receptor EP4 exerts neuronal and vascular protection in a
mouse model of cerebral ischemia. J Clin Invest 121(11):4362–
4371. doi:10.1172/JCI46279

105. Ahmad M, Ahmad AS, Zhuang H, Maruyama T, Narumiya S,
Dore S (2007) Stimulation of prostaglandin E2-EP3 receptors

Mol Neurobiol

exacerbates stroke and excitotoxic injury. J Neuroimmunol
184(1–2):172–179. doi:10.1016/j.jneuroim.2006.12.012

106. Montine TJ, Sidell KR, Crews BC, Markesbery WR, Marnett LJ,
Roberts LJ 2nd, Morrow JD (1999) Elevated CSF prostaglandin
E2 levels in patients with probable AD. Neurology 53(7):1495–
1498

107. Wong PT, McGeer PL, McGeer EG (1992) Decreased prostaglan-
din synthesis in postmortem cerebral cortex from patients with
Alzheimer’s disease. Neurochem Int 21(2):197–202

108. Akitake Y, Nakatani Y, Kamei D, Hosokawa M, Akatsu H,
Uematsu S, Akira S, Kudo I et al (2013) Microsomal prostaglan-
din E synthase-1 is induced in Alzheimer’s disease and its deletion
mitigates Alzheimer’s disease-like pathology in a mouse model. J
Neurosci Res 91(7):909–919. doi:10.1002/jnr.23217

109. Forloni G, Chiesa R, Smiroldo S, Verga L, Salmona M, Tagliavini
F, Angeretti N (1993) Apoptosis mediated neurotoxicity induced
by chronic application of beta amyloid fragment 25-35.
Neuroreport 4(5):523–526

110. Yagami T, Nakazato H, Ueda K, Asakura K, Kuroda T, Hata S,
Sakaeda T, Sakaguchi G et al (2003) Prostaglandin E2 rescues
cortical neurons from amyloid beta protein-induced apoptosis.
Brain Res 959(2):328–335

111. Echeverria V, Clerman A, Dore S (2005) Stimulation of PGE
receptors EP2 and EP4 protects cultured neurons against oxidative
stress and cell death following beta-amyloid exposure. Eur J
Neurosci 22(9):2199–2206. doi:10.1111/j.1460-9568.2005.
04427.x

112. Shie FS, Breyer RM, Montine TJ (2005) Microglia lacking E
prostanoid receptor subtype 2 have enhanced Abeta phagocytosis
yet lack Abeta-activated neurotoxicity. Am J Pathol 166(4):1163–
1172

113. Zhen G, Kim YT, Li RC, Yocum J, Kapoor N, Langer J,
Dobrowolski P, Maruyama T et al (2012) PGE2 EP1 receptor
exacerbated neurotoxicity in a mouse model of cerebral ischemia
and Alzheimer’s disease. Neurobiol Aging 33(9):2215–2219. doi:
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.09.017

114. Mattammal MB, Strong R, Lakshmi VM, Chung HD, Stephenson
AH (1995) Prostaglandin H synthetase-mediated metabolism of
dopamine: implication for Parkinson’s disease. J Neurochem
64(4):1645–1654

115. Dore-Duffy P, Ho SY, Donovan C (1991) Cerebrospinal fluid ei-
cosanoid levels: endogenous PGD2 and LTC4 synthesis by
antigen-presenting cells that migrate to the central nervous system.
Neurology 41(2 Pt 1):322–324

116. Bilak M, Wu L, Wang Q, Haughey N, Conant K, St Hillaire C,
Andreasson K (2004) PGE2 receptors rescue motor neurons in a
model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Ann Neurol 56(2):240–
248. doi:10.1002/ana.20179

117. Oliveira MS, Furian AF, Royes LF, Fighera MR, Fiorenza NG,
Castelli M, Machado P, Bohrer D et al (2008) Cyclooxygenase-2/
PGE2 pathway facilitates pentylenetetrazol-induced seizures.
Epilepsy Res 79(1):14–21. doi:10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2007.12.008
Jiang J, Quan Y, Ganesh T, Pouliot WA, Dudek FE, Dingledine R
(2013) Inhibition of the prostaglandin receptor EP2 following sta-
tus epilepticus reduces delayed mortality and brain inflammation.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110(9):3591–3596. doi:10.1073/pnas.
1218498110

118.

119. Takemiya T, Matsumura K, Sugiura H, Maehara M, Yasuda S,
Uematsu S, Akira S, Yamagata K (2010) Endothelial microsomal
prostaglandin E synthase-1 exacerbates neuronal loss induced by
kainate. J Neurosci Res 88(2):381–390. doi:10.1002/jnr.22195

120. Rojas A, Gueorguieva P, Lelutiu N, Quan Y, Shaw R, Dingledine
R (2014) The prostaglandin EP1 receptor potentiates kainate re-
ceptor activation via a protein kinase C pathway and exacerbates
status epilepticus. Neurobiol Dis 70:74–89. doi:10.1016/j.nbd.
2014.06.004

Mol Neurobiol

121. Kaiya H, Uematsu M, Ofuji M, Nishida A, Takeuchi K, Nozaki M,
Idaka E (1989) Elevated plasma prostaglandin E2 levels in schizo-
phrenia. J Neural Transm 77(1):39–46

122. Minghetti L, Cardone F, Greco A, Puopolo M, Levi G, Green AJ,
Knight R, Pocchiari M (2002) Increased CSF levels of prostaglan-
din E(2) in variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. Neurology 58(1):
127–129

123. Matsuo M, Yoshida N, Zaitsu M, Ishii K, Hamasaki Y (2004)
Inhibition of human glioma cell growth by a PHS-2 inhibitor,
NS398, and a prostaglandin E receptor subtype EP1-selective an-
tagonist, SC51089. J Neuro-Oncol 66(3):285–292

124. Watanabe K (2002) Prostaglandin F synthase. Prostaglandins

125.

Other Lipid Mediat 68–69:401–407
Ito S, Sakamoto K, Mochizuki-Oda N, Ezashi T, Miwa K, Okuda-
Ashitaka E, Shevchenko VI, Kiso Y et al (1994) Prostaglandin F2
alpha receptor is coupled to Gq in cDNA-transfected Chinese
hamster ovary cells. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 200(2):
756–762

126. Kitanaka J, Hasimoto H, Sugimoto Y, Negishi M, Aino H, Gotoh
M, Ichikawa A, Baba A (1994) Cloning and expression of a
cDNA for rat prostaglandin F2 alpha receptor. Prostaglandins
48(1):31–41

127. Ogawa H, Sasaki T, Kassell NF, Nakagomi T, Lehman RM,
Hongo K (1987) Immunohistochemical demonstration of increase
in prostaglandin F2-alpha after recirculation in global ischemic rat
brains. Acta Neuropathol 75(1):62–68

128. Saleem S, Ahmad AS, Maruyama T, Narumiya S, Dore S (2009)
PGF(2alpha) FP receptor contributes to brain damage following
transient focal brain ischemia. Neurotox Res 15(1):62–70. doi:10.
1007/s12640-009-9007-3

129. Wolfe LS, Mamer OA (1975) Measurement of prostaglandin
F2alpha levels in human cerebrospinal fluid in normal and patho-
logical conditions. Prostaglandins 9(2):183–192

130. Chung JI, Kim AY, Lee SH, Baik EJ (2013) Seizure susceptibility
in immature brain due to lack of COX-2-induced PGF2alpha. Exp
Neurol 249:95–103. doi:10.1016/j.expneurol.2013.08.014

131. Hara S, Miyata A, Yokoyama C, Inoue H, Brugger R, Lottspeich
F, Ullrich V, Tanabe T (1994) Isolation and molecular cloning of
prostacyclin synthase from bovine endothelial cells. J Biol Chem
269(31):19897–19903

132. Sanchez-Moreno C, Dashe JF, Scott T, Thaler D, Folstein MF,
Martin A (2004) Decreased levels of plasma vitamin C and in-
creased concentrations of inflammatory and oxidative stress
markers after stroke. Stroke J Cereb Circ 35(1):163–168. doi:10.
1161/01.STR.0000105391.62306.2E

133. Gryglewski RJ (1979) Prostacyclin as a circulatory hormone.

Biochem Pharmacol 28(21):3161–3166

134. Takechi H, Matsumura K, Watanabe Y, Kato K, Noyori R, Suzuki
M, Watanabe Y (1996) A novel subtype of the prostacyclin recep-
tor expressed in the central nervous system. J Biol Chem 271(10):
5901–5906

135. Satoh T, Ishikawa Y, Kataoka Y, Cui Y, Yanase H, Kato K,
Watanabe Y, Nakadate K et al (1999) CNS-specific prostacyclin
ligands as neuronal survival-promoting factors in the brain. Eur J
Neurosci 11(9):3115–3124

136. Hirata M, Hayashi Y, Ushikubi F, Yokota Y, Kageyama R,
Nakanishi S, Narumiya S (1991) Cloning and expression of
cDNA for a human thromboxane A2 receptor. Nature
349(6310):617–620. doi:10.1038/349617a0

137. Miggin SM, Kinsella BT (1998) Expression and tissue distribution
of the mRNAs encoding the human thromboxane A2 receptor
(TP) alpha and beta isoforms. Biochim Biophys Acta 1425(3):
543–559

138. Gao H, Peng B, Welch WJ, Wilcox CS (1997) Central thrombox-
ane receptors: mRNA expression and mediation of pressor re-
sponses. Am J Physiol 272(5 Pt 2):R1493–R1500

139. Cazevieille C, Muller A, Meynier F, Dutrait N, Bonne C (1994)
Protection by prostaglandins from glutamate toxicity in cortical
neurons. Neurochem Int 24(4):395–398

140. Sumimoto S, Muramatsu R, Yamashita T (2014) Thromboxane
A2 stimulates neurite outgrowth in cerebral cortical neurons via
mitogen activated protein kinase signaling. Brain Res. doi:10.
1016/j.brainres.2014.07.048

141. Fagan SC, Castellani D, Gengo FM (1986) Prostanoid concentra-
tions in human CSF following acute ischaemic brain infarction.
Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol 13(8):629–632

142. Steinhauer HB, Anhut H, Hertting G (1979) The synthesis of
prostaglandins and thromboxane in the mouse brain in vivo.
Influence of drug induced convulsions, hypoxia and the anticon-
vulsants trimethadione and diazepam. Naunyn Schmiedeberg’s
Arch Pharmacol 310(1):53–58

143. Hsu CY, Halushka PV, Hogan EL, Banik NL, Lee WA, Perot PL Jr
(1985) Alteration of thromboxane and prostacyclin levels in ex-
perimental spinal cord injury. Neurology 35(7):1003–1009

144. Giulian D, Corpuz M, Richmond B, Wendt E, Hall ER (1996)
Activated microglia are the principal glial source of thromboxane
in the central nervous system. Neurochem Int 29(1):65–76
Iwamoto N, Kobayashi K, Kosaka K (1989) The formation of
prostaglandins in the postmortem cerebral cortex of Alzheimer-
type dementia patients. J Neurol 236(2):80–84

145.

146. Tuppo EE, Forman LJ, Spur BW, Chan-Ting RE, Chopra A,
Cavalieri TA (2001) Sign of lipid peroxidation as measured in
the urine of patients with probable Alzheimer’s disease. Brain
Res Bull 54(5):565–568

147. Yagami T, Takahara Y, Ishibashi C, Sakaguchi G, Itoh N, Ueda K,
Nakazato H, Okamura N et al (2004) Amyloid beta protein im-
pairs motor function via thromboxane A2 in the rat striatum.
Neurobiol Dis 16(3):481–489. doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2004.04.013
van Kooten F, Ciabattoni G, Koudstaal PJ, Grobbee DE, Kluft C,
Patrono C (1999) Increased thromboxane biosynthesis is associat-
ed with poststroke dementia. Stroke J Cereb Circ 30(8):1542–
1547

148.

149. Urade Y, Eguchi N (2002) Lipocalin-type and hematopoietic pros-
taglandin D synthases as a novel example of functional conver-
gence. Prostaglandins Other Lipid Mediat 68–69:375–382

150. Urade Y, Kitahama K, Ohishi H, Kaneko T, Mizuno N, Hayaishi
O (1993) Dominant expression of mRNA for prostaglandin D
synthase in leptomeninges, choroid plexus, and oligodendrocytes
of the adult rat brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 90(19):9070–9074
151. Liang X, Wu L, Hand T, Andreasson K (2005) Prostaglandin D2
mediates neuronal protection via the DP1 receptor. J Neurochem
92(3):477–486. doi:10.1111/j.1471-4159.2004.02870.x

152. Xu S, Venge P (2000) Lipocalins as biochemical markers of dis-

ease. Biochim Biophys Acta 1482(1–2):298–307

153. Mohri I, Eguchi N, Suzuki K, Urade Y, Taniike M (2003)
Hematopoietic prostaglandin D synthase is expressed in microglia
in the developing postnatal mouse brain. Glia 42(3):263–274. doi:
10.1002/glia.10183

154. Hirata M, Kakizuka A, Aizawa M, Ushikubi F, Narumiya S (1994)
Molecular characterization of a mouse prostaglandin D receptor
and functional expression of the cloned gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 91(23):11192–11196

155. Abe H, Takeshita T, Nagata K, Arita T, Endo Y, Fujita T,
Takayama H, Kubo M et al (1999) Molecular cloning, chromo-
some mapping and characterization of the mouse CRTH2 gene, a
putative member of the leukocyte chemoattractant receptor fami-
ly. Gene 227(1):71–77

156. Hirai H, Tanaka K, Yoshie O, Ogawa K, Kenmotsu K, Takamori
Y, Ichimasa M, Sugamura K et al (2001) Prostaglandin D2 selec-
tively induces chemotaxis in T helper type 2 cells, eosinophils, and
basophils via seven-transmembrane receptor CRTH2. J Exp Med
193(2):255–261

157. Oida H, Hirata M, Sugimoto Y, Ushikubi F, Ohishi H, Mizuno N,
Ichikawa A, Narumiya S (1997) Expression of messenger RNA
for the prostaglandin D receptor in the leptomeninges of the mouse
brain. FEBS Lett 417(1):53–56

158. Gerashchenko D, Beuckmann CT, Kanaoka Y, Eguchi N, Gordon
WC, Urade Y, Bazan NG, Hayaishi O (1998) Dominant expres-
sion of rat prostanoid DP receptor mRNA in leptomeninges, inner
segments of photoreceptor cells, iris epithelium, and ciliary pro-
cesses. J Neurochem 71(3):937–945

159. Sawyer N, Cauchon E, Chateauneuf A, Cruz RP, Nicholson DW,
Metters KM, O’Neill GP, Gervais FG (2002) Molecular pharma-
cology of the human prostaglandin D2 receptor, CRTH2. Br J
Pharmacol 137(8):1163–1172. doi:10.1038/sj.bjp.0704973

160. Saleem S, Zhuang H, de Brum-Fernandes AJ, Maruyama T,
Narumiya S, Dore S (2007) PGD(2) DP1 receptor protects brain
from ischemia-reperfusion injury. Eur J Neurosci 26(1):73–78.
doi:10.1111/j.1460-9568.2007.05627.x

161. Yamashita A, Watanabe Y, Hayaishi O (1983) Autoradiographic
localization of a binding protein(s) specific for prostaglandin D2 in
rat brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 80(19):6114–6118

162. Huang ZL, Urade Y, Hayaishi O (2007) Prostaglandins and aden-
osine in the regulation of sleep and wakefulness. Curr Opin
Pharmacol 7(1):33–38. doi:10.1016/j.coph.2006.09.004

163. Gaudet RJ, Alam I, Levine L (1980) Accumulation of cyclooxy-
genase products of arachidonic acid metabolism in gerbil brain
during reperfusion after bilateral common carotid artery occlusion.
J Neurochem 35(3):653–658

164. Liu H, Li W, Rose ME, Pascoe JL, Miller TM, Ahmad M, Poloyac
SM, Hickey RW et al (2013) Prostaglandin D2 toxicity in primary
neurons is mediated through its bioactive cyclopentenone metab-
olites. Neurotoxicology 39:35–44. doi:10.1016/j.neuro.2013.08.
001

165. Shimizu T, Yamashita A, Hayaishi O (1982) Specific binding of
prostaglandin D2 to rat brain synaptic membrane. Occurrence,
properties, and distribution. J Biol Chem 257(22):13570–13575
166. Wright DH, Nantel F, Metters KM, Ford-Hutchinson AW (1999)
A novel biological role for prostaglandin D2 is suggested by dis-
tribution studies of the rat DP prostanoid receptor. Eur J
Pharmacol 377(1):101–115

167. Boie Y, Sawyer N, Slipetz DM, Metters KM, Abramovitz M
(1995) Molecular cloning and characterization of the human pros-
tanoid DP receptor. J Biol Chem 270(32):18910–18916

168. Watanabe Y, Tokumoto H, Yamashita A, Narumiya S, Mizuno N,
Hayaishi O (1985) Specific bindings of prostaglandin D2, E2 and
F2 alpha in postmortem human brain. Brain Res 342(1):110–116
169. Wu L, Wang Q, Liang X, Andreasson K (2007) Divergent effects
of prostaglandin receptor signaling on neuronal survival. Neurosci
Lett 421(3):253–258

170. Koh SH, Jung B, Song CW, Kim Y, Kim YS, Kim SH (2005) 15-
Deoxy-delta12,14-prostaglandin J2, a neuroprotectant or a
neurotoxicant? Toxicology 216(2–3):232–243. doi:10.1016/j.tox.
2005.08.015

171. Hata AN, Zent R, Breyer MD, Breyer RM (2003) Expression and
molecular pharmacology of the mouse CRTH2 receptor. J

Mol Neurobiol

Pharmacol Exp Ther 306(2):463–470. doi:10.1124/jpet.103.
050955

172. Forman BM, Tontonoz P, Chen J, Brun RP, Spiegelman BM,
Evans RM (1995) 15-Deoxy-delta 12, 14-prostaglandin J2 is a
ligand for the adipocyte determination factor PPAR gamma. Cell
83(5):803–812

173. Kliewer SA, Lenhard JM, Willson TM, Patel I, Morris DC,
Lehmann JM (1995) A prostaglandin J2 metabolite binds perox-
isome proliferator-activated receptor gamma and promotes adipo-
cyte differentiation. Cell 83(5):813–819

174. Heneka MT, Klockgether T, Feinstein DL (2000) Peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma ligands reduce neuronal in-
ducible nitric oxide synthase expression and cell death in vivo. J
Neurosci Off J Soc Neurosci 20(18):6862–6867

175. Sundararajan S, Gamboa JL, Victor NA, Wanderi EW, Lust WD,
Landreth GE (2005) Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-
gamma ligands reduce inflammation and infarction size in tran-
sient focal ischemia. Neuroscience 130(3):685–696
Inestrosa NC, Godoy JA, Quintanilla RA, Koenig CS, Bronfman
M (2005) Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma is
expressed in hippocampal neurons and its activation prevents
beta-amyloid neurodegeneration: role of Wnt signaling. Exp Cell
Res 304(1):91–104

176.

177. Fitzpatrick FA, Wynalda MA (1983) Albumin-catalyzed metabo-
lism of prostaglandin D2. Identification of products formed
in vitro. J Biol Chem 258(19):11713–11718

178. Rohn TT, Wong SM, Cotman CW, Cribbs DH (2001) 15-deoxy-
delta12,14-prostaglandin J2, a specific ligand for peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma, induces neuronal apopto-
sis. Neuroreport 12(4):839–843

179. Shibata T, Yamada T, Kondo M, Tanahashi N, Tanaka K,
Nakamura H, Masutani H, Yodoi J et al (2003) An endogenous
electrophile that modulates the regulatory mechanism of protein
turnover: inhibitory effects of 15-deoxy-Delta 12,14-prostaglan-
din J2 on proteasome. Biochemistry 42(47):13960–13968. doi:
10.1021/bi035215a

180. Mullally JE, Moos PJ, Edes K, Fitzpatrick FA (2001)
Cyclopentenone prostaglandins of the J series inhibit the ubiqui-
tin isopeptidase activity of the proteasome pathway. J Biol Chem
276(32):30366–30373. doi:10.1074/jbc.M102198200
Ishii T, Uchida K (2004) Induction of reversible cysteine-targeted
protein oxidation by an endogenous electrophile 15-deoxy-del-
ta12,14-prostaglandin J2. Chem Res Toxicol 17(10):1313–1322.
doi:10.1021/tx049860+

181.

182. Uchida K, Shibata T (2008) 15-Deoxy-Delta(12,14)-prostaglan-
din J2: an electrophilic trigger of cellular responses. Chem Res
Toxicol 21(1):138–144. doi:10.1021/tx700177j

183. Blanchard HC, Taha AY, Rapoport SI, Yuan ZX (2015) Low-dose
aspirin (acetylsalicylate) prevents increases in brain PGE2, 15-epi-
lipoxin A4 and 8-isoprostane concentrations in 9 month-old HIV-1
transgenic rats, a model for HIV-1 associated neurocognitive dis-
orders. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fat Acids 96:25–30. doi:10.
1016/j.plefa.2015.01.002

